for	both	the	customer	and	the	machinery.	The	ATM	architecture	has	a	physical network	layer,	a	switch	and	a communication	layer	connecting	the	various	ATM	POS	terminals. Recommended	internal	control	guidelines	for	ATMs,	apart	from	what	has	been provided	for	any	EFT,	include	the	following: ·	Written	policies	and	procedures	covering	personnel,	security	controls, operations,	disaster	recovery	credit	and	check	authorization,	floor	limits, override,	settlement,	and	balancing ·	Reconciliation	of	all	general	ledger	accounts	related	to	retail	EFTs	and	review of	exception	items	and	suspense	accounts ·	Procedures	for	PIN	issuance	and	protection	during	storage ·	Procedures	for	the	security	of	PINs	during	delivery	and	the	restriction	of	access to	a	customer's	account	after	a	small	number	of	unsuccessful	attempts ·	Systems	designed,	tested	and	controlled	to	preclude	retrieval	of	stored	PINs	in any	nonencrypted	form.	Application	programs	and	other	software	containing formulas,	algorithms	and	data	used	to	calculate	PINs	must	be	subject	to	the highest	level	of	access	for	security	purposes. ·	Controls	over	plastic	card	procurement,	which	should	be	adequate	and	include a	written	agreement	between	the	card	manufacturer	and	the	bank	that	details control	procedures	and	methods	of	resolution	to	be	followed	if	problems	occur ·	Controls	and	audit	trails	of	the	transactions	that	have	been	made	in	the	ATM. This	should	include	internal	registration	in	the	ATM,	either	in	internal	paper	or digital	media,	depending	on	regulation	or	laws	in	each	country	and	on	the	hosts that	are	involved	in	the	transaction.

## IS	Auditor's	Role	in	the	Use	of	ATMs

To	perform	an	audit	of	ATMs,	an	IS	auditor	should	undertake	the	following actions:

- Review	physical	security	to	prevent	introduction	of	malware. ·	Review	measures	to	establish	proper	customer	identification	and	maintenance of	their	confidentiality. ·	Review	file	maintenance	and	retention	system	to	trace	transactions. ·	Review	exception	reports	to	provide	an	audit	trail. ·	Review	daily	reconciliation	of	ATM	transactions	including: -	Review	SoD	in	the	opening	of	the	ATM	and	recount	of	deposit. -	Review	the	procedures	made	for	the	retained	cards. ·	Review	encryption	key	change	management	procedures. -	Review	physical	security	measures	to	ensure	security	of	the	ATM	and	the money	contained	in	the	ATM. -	Review	the	ATM	card	slot,	keypad	and	enclosure	to	prevent	skimming of	card	data	and	capture	of	PIN	during	entry.

## Electronic	Finance

Electronic	finance	(efinance)	is	an	integral	element	of	the	financial	services industry	and	enables	providers	to	emerge	within	and	across	countries,	including online	banks,	brokerages	and	companies	that	allow	consumers	to	compare financial	services	such	as	mortgage	loans	and	insurance	policies. Nonfinancial	entities	have	also	entered	the	market,	including telecommunication	and	utility	companies	that	offer	payment	and	other	services. Advantages	of	this	approach	to	consumers	are: ·	Lower	costs ·	Increased	breadth	and	quality

·	Widening	access	to	financial	services ·	Asynchrony	(time-decoupled) ·	Atopy	(location-decoupled) By	using	credit	scoring	and	other	data	mining	techniques,	providers	can	create and	tailor	products	over	the	Internet	without	much	human	input	and	at	a	very low	cost.	Providers	can	better	stratify	their	customer	base	through	analysis	of Internet-collected	data	and	allow	consumers	to	build	preference	profiles	online. This	not	only	permits	personalization	of	information	and	services,	it	also	allows more	personalized	pricing	of	financial	services	and	more	effective	identification of	credit	risk.	At	the	same	time,	the	Internet	allows	new	financial	service providers	to	compete	more	effectively	for	customers	because	it	does	not distinguish	between	traditional	brick-and-mortar	providers	of	financial	services and	those	without	physical	presence. All	these	forces	are	delivering	large	benefits	to	consumers	at	the	retail	and commercial	levels.	These	mechanisms	should	be	used	within	privacy	law statements	(regarding	confidentiality	and	authorization)	to	gather	diverse	user information	and	set	up	profiles.

## Integrated	Manufacturing	Systems

Integrated	manufacturing	systems	(IMS)	have	a	long	history	and, accordingly,	there	are	many	models	and	approaches.	Some	of	the	integrated manufacturing	systems	include	bill	of	materials	(BOM),	BOM	processing (BOMP),	manufacturing	resources	planning	(MRP),	computer-assisted	design (CAD),	computer-integrated	(or	computer-intensive)	manufacturing	(CIM),	and manufacturing	accounting	and	production	(MAP).	Original	IMSs	were	based	on BOM	and	BOMP	and	usually	supported	by	a	hierarchical	database	management system	(DBMS). Evolution	toward	further	integration	with	other	business	functions	(e.g., recording	of	raw	materials,	work-in-process	and	finished	goods	transactions, inventory	adjustments,	purchases,	supplier	management,	sales,	accounts	payable, accounts	receivable,	goods	received,	inspection,	invoices,	cost	accounting, maintenance)	led	to	MRP	(initially	standing	for	material	requirements processing,	now	for	manufacturing	resources	planning),	which	is	a	family	of widely	used	standards	and	standard-based	packages.	MRP	is	a	typical	module	of most	ERP	packages	such	as	SAP	or	Oracle	Financials	and	is	usually	integrated	in modern	customer	relationship	management	(CRM)	and	supply	chain management	(SCM)	systems. CAD,	computer-assisted	engineering	(CAE)	and	computer-assisted manufacturing	(CAM)-the	latter	including	computerized	numeric	control (CNC)-have	led	to	CIM.	CIM	is	frequently	used	to	run	huge	lights-out	plants, with	a	significant	portion	of	consumer	goods	being	manufactured	in	these environments. The	significance	to	an	IS	auditor	is	the	high	number	of	systems	and	applications using	these	technologies.	The	larger	the	scale	of	integration,	the	more	IS	auditor attention	is	required.	Highly	integrated	CIM	projects	require	the	same	attention from	an	IS	auditor	as	the	ERPs	previously	mentioned	in	this	chapter.	They	are major	undertakings	that	should	be	based	on	comprehensive	feasibility	studies and	subject	to	top	management	approval	and	close	supervision.

## Interactive	Voice	Response

In	telephony,	interactive	voice	response	(IVR)	is	a	phone	technology	that	allows a	computer	to	detect	voice	and	touch	tones	using	a	normal	phone	call. The	caller	uses	the	telephone	keypad	to	select	from	preset	menu	choices provided	by	the	IVR.	The	IVR	system	then	responds	with	prerecorded	or dynamically	generated	audio	to	further	direct	callers	or	route	the	caller	to	a customer	service	representative.	IVR	systems	can	be	used	to	control	almost	any function	in	which	the	interface	can	be	broken	down	into	a	series	of	simple	menu choices.	IVR	systems	generally	scale	well	to	handle	large	call	volumes. An	IS	auditor	should	ensure	that	there	are	controls	over	such	systems	in	place	to prevent	unauthorized	individuals	from	entering	system-level	commands	that	may permit	them	to	change	or	rerecord	menu	options.

## Purchase	Accounting	System

Financial	transactions	are	frequently	processed	through	more	than	one	system.

For	example,	in	a	retail	store,	a	sale	is	first	processed	in	the	sales	accounting system,	then	processed	by	the	accounts	receivable	system	(if	the	purchase	was by	credit	card)	and,	for	either	cash	or	credit	sales,	through	the	inventory	system (when	they	are	linked).	That	same	sale	might	trigger	the	purchase	accounting system	to	replace	depleted	inventory.	Eventually	the	transactions	become	part	of the	general	ledger	system	because	all	transactions	are	recorded	somewhere	in that	system.	For	the	integration	of	systems	to	be	effective,	processing	of	a financial	transaction	must	be	complete,	accurate	and	timely.	If	it	is	not,	a	ripple effect	impairs	the	integrity	of	the	data. Purchase	accounting	systems	process	the	data	for	purchases	and	payments. Because	purchases	automatically	lead	to	payments,	if	purchases	are	properly contracted,	partial	control	over	payments	exists.	Additional	controls	over payments	are	also	required	to	ensure	that	each	payment	was	made	for	goods	and services	received,	that	the	same	purchase	was	not	paid	for	twice,	and	that	they were,	indeed,	paid.	Most	purchase	accounting	systems	perform	three	basic accounting	functions: 1. Accounts	payable	processing -Recording	transactions	in	the	accounts payable	records 2. Goods	received	processing -Recording	details	of	goods	received	but	not	yet invoiced 3. Order	processing -Recording	goods	ordered	but	not	yet	received Image	Processing Some	of	the	many	algorithms	used	in	image	processing	include	convolution	(on which	many	others	are	based),	fast	Fourier	transform	(FFT),	discrete	cosine transform	(DCT),	thinning	(or	skeletonization),	edge	detection	and	contrast enhancement.	These	are	usually	implemented	in	software	but	may	also	use special-purpose	hardware	for	speed. An	imaging	system	stores,	retrieves	and	processes	graphic	data,	such	as	pictures, charts	and	graphs,	instead	of	or	in	addition	to	text	data.	The	storage	capacities must	be	enormous,	and	most	image	systems	include	optical	disk	storage.	In addition	to	optical	disks,	the	systems	include	high-speed	scanning,	highresolution	displays,	rapid	and	powerful	compression,	communications	functions, and	laser	printing.	The	systems	include	techniques	that	can	identify	levels	of shades	and	colors	that	cannot	be	differentiated	by	the	human	eye. These	systems	are	expensive,	and	companies	do	not	invest	in	them	lightly. Most	businesses	that	perform	image	processing	obtain	benefits	from	using	the imaging	system.	Examples	of	potential	benefits	are: ·	Item	processing	(e.g.,	signature	storage	and	retrieval) ·	Immediate	retrieval	via	a	secure	optical	storage	medium ·	Increased	productivity ·	Improved	control	over	paper	files ·	Reduced	deterioration	due	to	handling ·	Enhanced	disaster	recovery	procedures The	replacement	of	paper	documents	with	electronic	images	can	have	a significant	impact	on	the	way	an	organization	does	business.	Many	of	the traditional	controls	for	paper-based	systems	may	be	reduced	or	absent	in electronic	documentation	workflow.	New	controls	must	be	developed	and designed	into	the	automated	process	to	ensure	that	information	image	files cannot	be	altered,	erased	or	lost. Risk	areas	that	management	should	address	when	installing	imaging	systems	and that	an	IS	auditor	should	be	aware	of	when	reviewing	an	institution's	controls over	imaging	systems	include: · Planning -The	lack	of	careful	planning	in	selecting	and	converting	paper systems	to	document	imaging	systems	can	result	in	excessive	installation	costs, the	destruction	of	original	documents	and	the	failure	to	achieve	expected benefits.	Critical	issues	include	converting	existing	paper	storage	files	and integration	of	the	imaging	system	into	the	organization	workflow	and	electronic media	storage	to	meet	audit	and	document	retention	legal	requirements. · Audit -Imaging	systems	may	change	or	eliminate	the	traditional	controls	as well	as	the	checks	and	balances	inherent	in	paper-based	systems.	Audit procedures	may	have	to	be	redesigned	and	new	controls	designed	into	the automated	process. · Redesign	of	workflow -Institutions	generally	redesign	or	reengineer workflow	processes	to	benefit	from	imaging	technology. · Scanning	devices -Scanning	devices	are	the	entry	point	for	image	documents and	a	significant	risk	area	in	imaging	systems.	They	can	disrupt	workflow	if	the scanning	equipment	is	not	adequate	to	handle	the	volume	of	documents	or	the equipment	breaks	down.	The	absence	of	controls	over	the	scanning	process	can result	in	poor	quality	images,	improper	indexing,	and	incomplete	or	forged documents	being	entered	into	the	system. Procedures	should	be	in	place	to	ensure	that	original	documents	are	not destroyed	before	determining	that	a	good	image	has	been	captured. · Software	security -Security	controls	over	image	system	documents	are critical	to	protect	institutions	and	customer	information	from	unauthorized access	and	modifications.	The	integrity	and	reliability	of	the	imaging	system database	are	related	directly	to	the	quality	of	controls	over	access	to	the	system. · Training -Inadequate	training	of	personnel	scanning	the	documents	can	result in	poor-quality	document	images	and	indexes,	and	the	early	destruction	of original	documents.	The	installation	and	use	of	imaging	systems	can	be	a	major change	for	department	personnel.	They	must	be	trained	adequately	to	ensure quality	control	over	the	scanning	and	storage	of	imaging	documents	as	well	as the	use	of	the	system	to	maximize	the	benefits	of	converting	to	imaging	systems. Industrial	Control	Systems Industrial	control	system	(ICS)	is	a	general	term	that	encompasses	several	types of	control	systems,	including	supervisory	control	and	data	acquisition

<!-- image -->

(SCADA)	systems,	distributed	control	systems	(DCS),	and	other	control	system configurations	such	as	programmable	logic	controllers	(PLC),	often	found	in	the

industrial	sectors	and	critical	infrastructures. Figure	1.3 provides	a	high-level	overview	of	typical	ICS	process	flows. Source:	NIST; NIST	SP	800-82:	Guide	to	Industrial	Control	Systems	(ICS) Security ,	USA,	2011

## Risk	Factors

Based	on	the	criticality	that	ICSs	have	on	manufacturing,	chemical	processes and,	more	important,	critical	infrastructure	(energy	generation,	transmission	and control,	water	treatment,	etc.),	there	are	key	risk	factors	that	an	IS	auditor	must consider: ·	Blocked	or	delayed	flow	of	information	through	ICS	networks,	which	could

## disrupt	ICS	operation

·	Unauthorized	changes	to	instructions,	commands	or	alarm	thresholds,	which could	damage,	disable	or	shut	down	equipment,	create environmental	impacts,	and/or	endanger	human	life ·	Inaccurate	information	sent	to	system	operators,	either	to	disguise	unauthorized changes	or	to	cause	the	operators	to	initiate	inappropriate	actions,	which	could have	various	negative	effects ·	ICS	software	or	configuration	settings	modified,	or	ICS	software	infected	with malware,	which	could	have	various	negative	effects ·	Interference	with	the	operation	of	safety	systems,	which	could	endanger	human life

## Typical	Controls

To	address	risk,	the	following	controls	should	be	considered	within	the administrative,	operational	and	technical	implementation	of	ICS: ·	Restricting	logical	access	to	the	ICS	network	and	network	activity.	This includes	using	a	demilitarized	zone	(DMZ)	network	architecture	with	firewalls to	prevent	network	traffic	from	passing	directly	between	the	corporate	and	ICS networks	and	having	separate	authentication mechanisms	and	credentials	for	users	of	the	corporate	and	ICS	networks. The	ICS	should	also	use	a	network	topology	that	has	multiple	layers,	with	the most	critical	communications	occurring	in	the	most	secure	and	reliable	layer. ·	Restricting	physical	access	to	the	ICS	network	and	devices.	Unauthorized physical	access	to	components	could	cause	serious	disruption	of	the	ICS's functionality.	A	combination	of	physical	access	controls	should	be	used,	such	as locks,	card	readers	and/or	guards. ·	Protecting	individual	ICS	components	from	exploitation.	This	includes deploying	security	patches	in	as	expeditious	a	manner	as	possible,	after	testing them	under	field	conditions;	disabling	all	unused	ports	and	services;	restricting ICS	user	privileges	to	only	those	that	are	required	for	each	person's	role; tracking	and	monitoring	audit	trails;	and	using	security	controls	such	as	antivirus software	and	file	integrity	checking	software,	where	technically	feasible,	to prevent,	deter,	detect	and	mitigate	malware. ·	Maintaining	functionality	during	adverse	conditions.	This	involves	designing the	ICS	so	that	each	critical	component	has	a	redundant	counterpart. Additionally,	if	a	component	fails,	it	should	fail	in	a	manner	that	does	not generate	unnecessary	traffic	on	the	ICS	or	other	networks,	or	does	not	cause another	problem	elsewhere,	such	as	a	cascading	event. response	plan	is	essential.	A	major	characteristic	of	a	good	security	program	is

·	Restoring	the	system	after	an	incident.	Incidents	are	inevitable,	and	an	incident how	quickly	a	system	can	be	recovered	after	an	incident	has	occurred.

## Artificial	Intelligence	and	Expert	Systems

Artificial	intelligence	(AI)	is	the	study	and	application	of	the	principles	by which: ·	Knowledge	is	acquired	and	used. ·	Goals	are	generated	and	achieved. ·	Information	is	communicated. ·	Collaboration	is	achieved. ·	Concepts	are	formed. ·	Languages	are	developed. AI	fields	include,	among	others: ·	Expert	systems ·	Natural	and	artificial	(such	as	programming)	languages ·	Neural	networks ·	Intelligent	text	management

- Theorem	proving

·	Abstract	reasoning ·	Pattern	recognition ·	Voice	recognition ·	Problem	solving ·	Machine	translation	of	foreign	languages Expert	systems	are	an	area	of	AI	and	perform	a	specific	function	or	are	prevalent in	certain	industries.	An	expert	system	allows	the	user	to	specify	certain	basic assumptions	or	formulas	and	then	uses	these	assumptions	or	formulas	to	analyze arbitrary	events.	Based	on	the	information	used	as	input	to	the	system,	a conclusion	is	produced. The	use	of	expert	systems	has	many	potential	benefits	within	an	organization including:

- Capturing	the	knowledge	and	experience	of	individuals

<!-- image -->

·	Sharing	knowledge	and	experience

- Enhancing	personnel	productivity	and	performance

·	Automating	highly	(statistically)	repetitive	tasks	(help	desk,	score	credits,	etc.)

·	Operating	in	environments	where	a	human	expert	is	not	available	(e.g.,	medical assistance	on	board	of	a	ship,	satellites)

Expert	systems	are	comprised	of	the	primary	components	shown	in figure 1.4 ,	called	shells	when	they	are	not	populated	with	particular	data,	and	the shells	are	designed	to	host	new	expert	systems. Key	to	the	system	is	the	knowledge	base	(KB),	which	contains	specific information	or	fact	patterns	associated	with	particular	subject	matter	and	the rules	for	interpreting	these	facts.	The	KB	interfaces	with	a	database	in	obtaining data	to	analyze	a	particular	problem	in	deriving	an	expert	conclusion.	The information	in	the	KB	can	be	expressed	in	several	ways: · Decision	trees -Use	of	questionnaires	to	lead	the	user	through	a	series	of choices,	until	a	conclusion	is	reached.	Flexibility	is	compromised	because	the user	must	answer	the	questions	in	an	exact	sequence. · Rules -Expression	of	declarative	knowledge	through	the	use	of	if-then relationships.	For	example,	if	a	patient's	body	temperature	is	over	39°C (102.2°F)	and	their	pulse	is	under	60,	then	the	patient	might	be	suffering	from	a certain	disease. · Semantic	nets -Use	of	a	graph	in	which	the	nodes	represent	physical	or conceptual	objects	and	the	arcs	describe	the	relationship	between	the	nodes. Semantic	nets	resemble	a	data	flow	diagram	and	make	use	of	an	inheritance mechanism	to	prevent	duplication	of	data.	Additionally,	the	inference	engine shown	is	a	program	that	uses	the	KB	and	determines	the	most	appropriate outcome	based	on	the	information	supplied	by	the	user.	In	addition,	an	expert system	includes	the	following	components: -Knowledge	interface -Inclusion	of	knowledge	from	an	expert	into	the	system without	the	traditional	mediation	of	a	software	engineer -Data	interface -Collection	of	data	from	nonhuman	sources	through	an	expert system,	such	as	measurement	instruments	in	a	power	plant An	explanation	module	that	is	user-oriented	in	addressing	the	problem	is analyzed,	and	the	expert	conclusion	reached	is	also	provided.

## IS	Auditor's	Role	in	Expert	Systems

Well-designed	questionnaires	or	software	that	integrates	and	reports	on	system parameters	and	data	sets	are	available	to	assist	IS	auditors	in	reviewing	these systems.	Other	accounting-and	auditing-related	applications	for	expert	systems include	audit	planning,	internal	control	analysis,	account	attribute	analysis, quality	review,	accounting	decisions,	tax	planning	and	user	training.	Consistent with	standard	systems	development	methodologies,	stringent	change	control procedures	should	be	followed	because	the	basic	assumptions	and	formulas	may need	to	be	changed	as	more	expertise	is	gained.	As	with	other	systems,	access should	be	on	a	need-to-know	basis. An	IS	auditor	should	be	knowledgeable	about	the	various	AI	and	expert	system applications	used	within	the	organization.	An	IS	auditor	needs	to	be	concerned with	the	controls	relevant	to	these	systems	when	used	as	an	integral	part	of	an organization's	business	process	or	mission-critical	functions,	and	the	level	of experience	or	intelligence	used	as	a	basis	for	developing	the	software.	This	is critical	because	errors	produced	by	AI	systems	may	have	a	more	severe	impact than	those	produced	by	traditional	systems.	This	is	true	especially	of	intelligent systems	that	facilitate	healthcare professionals	in	the	diagnosis	and	treatment	of	injuries	and	illnesses.	Error loops/routines	should	be	designed	into	these	systems. Specifically,	an	IS	auditor	should	perform	the	following	activities: ·	Understand	the	purpose	and	functionality	of	the	system. ·	Assess	the	system's	significance	to	the	organization	and	related	businesses processes	as	well	as	the	associated	potential	risk. ·	Review	the	adherence	of	the	system	to	corporate	policies	and	procedures. ·	Review	the	decision	logic	built	into	the	system	to	ensure	that	the	expert knowledge	or	intelligence	in	the	system	is	sound	and	accurate.	An	IS

auditor	should	ensure	that	the	proper	level	of	expertise	was	used	in	developing the	basic	assumptions	and	formulas. ·	Review	procedures	for	updating	information	in	the	KB. ·	Review	security	access	over	the	system,	specifically	the	KB. ·	Review	procedures	to	ensure	that	qualified	resources	are	available	for maintenance	and	upgrading.

## Supply	Chain	Management

Supply	chain	management	(SCM)	is	linking	the	business	processes	between	the related	entities	such	as	the	buyer	and	the	seller.	The	link	is	provided	to	all	the connected	areas	such	as	managing	logistics	and	the	exchange	of	information, services	and	goods	among	supplier,	consumer,	warehouse,	wholesale/retail distributors	and	the	manufacturer	of	goods. SCM	has	become	a	focal	point	and	is	seen	as	a	new	area	in	strategic management	because	of	the	shift	in	the	business	scenario	at	the	advent	of	global competition,	proliferation	of	the	Internet,	the	instantaneous	transmission	of information	and	web	presence	in	all	spheres	of	business	activities.	SCM	includes managing	the	flow	of	goods,	services	and	information	among	suppliers, manufacturers,	wholesalers,	distributors,	stores,	consumers	and	end	users. SCM	shifts	the	focus;	all	the	entities	in	the	supply	chain	can	work collaboratively	and	in	real	time,	thus	reducing,	to	a	great	extent,	the	required available	inventory.	The	just-in-time	(JIT)	concept	becomes	possible,	and	the cycle	time	is	reduced	with	an	objective	of	reducing	unneeded	inventory. Seasonal	(e.g.,	both	availability	and	demand)	and	regional	(e.g.,	preferences	in size,	shape,	quantity)	factors	are	addressed. Stock	levels	of	nonmoving	items	are	significantly	reduced,	and	there	is	an automated	flow	of	supply	and	demand.	Also,	the	intrinsic	costs	and	errors associated	with	the	manual	means	such	as	fax,	input	of	data,	delay	and inaccurate	orders,	can	be	avoided.

## Customer	Relationship	Management

The	customer-driven	business	trend	is	to	be	focused	on	the	wants	and	needs	of the	customers.	This	emphasizes	the	importance	of	focusing	on	information relating	to	transaction	data,	preferences,	purchase	patterns,	status,	contact history,	demographic	information	and	service	trends	of	customers,	rather	than	on products. All	these	factors	lead	CRM,	which	is	an	optimum	combination	of	strategy, tactics,	processes,	skill	sets	and	technology.	CRM	has	become	a	strategic	success factor	for	all	types	of	business,	and	its	proficiency	has	a	significant	impact	on profitability. Customer-centered	applications	focus	on	CRM	processes	emphasizing	the customer,	rather	than	marketing,	sales	or	any	other	function	in	order	to	meet customer	expectations.	This	includes	integration	of	telephony,	web	and	database technologies,	and	interenterprise	integration	capabilities.	In	this	model,	other business	partners	can	share	information,	communicate	and	collaborate	with	the organization	with	the	seamless	integration	of	web-enabled	applications	and without	changing	their	local	network	and	other	configurations. It	is	possible	to	distinguish	between	operational	and	analytical	CRM. Operational	CRM	is	concerned	with	maximizing	the	utility	of	the	customer's service	experience	while	also	capturing	useful	data	about	the	customer interaction.	Analytical	CRM	seeks	to	analyze	information	captured	by	the organization	about	its	customers	and	their	interactions	with	the	organization	into information	that	allows	greater	value	to	be	obtained	from	the	customer	base. Among	uses	of	analytical	CRM	are	increasing	customer	product holdings	or	'share	of	customer	wallet,'	moving	customers	into	higher	margin products,	moving	customers	to	lower-cost	service	channels,	increasing marketing	success	rates,	and	making	pricing	decisions.

## 1.2.6	USING	THE	SERVICES	OF	OTHER	AUDITORS	AND

## EXPERTS

Due	to	the	scarcity	of	IS	auditors	and	the	need	for	IT	security	specialists	and other	subject	matter	experts	to	conduct	audits	of	highly	specialized	areas,	the audit	department	or	auditors	entrusted	with	providing	assurance	may	require	the services	of	other	auditors	or	experts.	Outsourcing	of	IS	assurance	and	security services	is	increasingly	becoming	a	common	practice.

External	experts	could	include	experts	in	specific	technologies	such	as networking,	automated	teller	machines,	wireless,	systems	integration	and	digital forensics,	or	subject	matter	experts	such	as	specialists	in	a	particular	industry	or area	of	specialization	such	as	banking,	securities	trading,	insurance	or	the	law. When	a	part	or	all	of	IS	audit	services	are	proposed	to	be	outsourced	to	another audit	or	external	service	provider,	the	following	should	be	considered	with regard	to	using	the	services	of	other	auditors	and	experts: ·	Restrictions	on	outsourcing	of	audit/security	services	provided	by	laws	and regulations ·	Audit	charter	or	contractual	stipulations ·	Impact	on	overall	and	specific	IS	audit	objectives ·	Impact	on	IS	audit	risk	and	professional	liability ·	Independence	and	objectivity	of	other	auditors	and	experts ·	Professional	competence,	qualifications	and	experience ·	Scope	of	work	proposed	to	be	outsourced	and	approach ·	Supervisory	and	audit	management	controls ·	Method	and	modalities	of	communication	of	results	of	audit	work ·	Compliance	with	legal	and	regulatory	stipulations ·	Compliance	with	applicable	professional	standards Based	on	the	nature	of	assignment,	the	following	may	also	require	special consideration: ·	Testimonials/references	and	background	checks ·	Access	to	systems,	premises	and	records ·	Confidentiality	restrictions	to	protect	customer-related	information

·	Use	of	computer-assisted	auditing	techniques	(CAATs)	and	other	tools	to	be used	by	the	external	audit	service	provider ·	Standards	and	methodologies	for	performance	of	work	and	documentation ·	Nondisclosure	agreements The	IS	auditor	or	entity	outsourcing	the	auditing	services	should	monitor	the relationship	to	ensure	the	objectivity	and	independence	throughout	the	duration of	the	arrangement.	It	is	important	to	understand	that	although	a	part	of	or	the whole	of	the	audit	work	may	be	delegated	to	an	external	service	provider,	the related	professional	liability	is	not	necessarily	delegated. Therefore,	it	is	the	responsibility	of	the	IS	auditor	or	entity	employing	the services	of	external	service	providers	to	do	the	following: ·	Clearly	communicate	the	audit	objectives,	scope	and	methodology	through	a formal	engagement	letter. ·	Establish	a	monitoring	process	for	regular	review	of	the	work	of	the	external service	provider	with	regard	to	planning,	supervision,	review	and documentation.	For	example,	the	work	papers	of	other	IS	auditors	or	experts should	be	reviewed	to	confirm	the	work	was	appropriately	planned,	supervised, documented	and	reviewed	and	to	consider	the	appropriateness	and	sufficiency	of the	audit	evidence	provided.	Likewise,	the	reports	of	other	IS	auditors	or	experts should	be	reviewed	to	confirm	the	scope	specified	in	the	audit	charter,	terms	of reference	or	letter	of	engagement	has	been	met,	that	any	significant	assumptions used	by	other	IS	auditors	or	experts	have	been	identified,	and	the	findings	and conclusions	reported	have	been	agreed	on	by	management. ·	Assess	the	usefulness	and	appropriateness	of	reports	of	such	external	providers and	assess	the	impact	of	significant	findings	on	the	overall	audit	objectives. Note: The	IS	auditor	should	be	familiar	with	ISACA	Audit	and	Assurance Standard	1203	Performance	and	Supervision	and	the	IS	Audit	and Assurance	Guideline	2206	Using	the	Work	of	Other	Experts,	focusing	on the	rights	of	access	to	the	work	of	other	experts.

## 1.3	TYPES	OF	CONTROLS

Every	organization	has	controls	in	place.	An	effective	control	is	one	that prevents,	detects	and/or	contains	an	incident	and	enables	recovery	from	a	risk event.	Organizations	design,	develop,	implement	and	monitor	information systems	through	policies,	procedures,	practices	and	organizational	structures	to address	these	types	of	risk. Controls	are	normally	composed	of	policies,	procedures,	practices	and organizational	structures	that	are	implemented	to	reduce	risk	to	the	organization. Internal	controls	are	developed	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	to	management that	the	organization's	business	objectives	will	be	achieved,	and	risk	events	will be	prevented,	or	detected	and	corrected.	Internal	control	activities	and	supporting processes	are	either	manual	or	automated.	Internal	controls	operate	at	all	levels within	an	organization	to	mitigate	its	exposures	to	risk	that	potentially	could prevent	it	from	achieving	its	business	objectives. The	board	of	directors	and	senior	management	are	responsible	for	establishing the	appropriate	culture	to	facilitate	an	effective	and	efficient	internal	control system	and	for	continuously	monitoring	the	effectiveness	of	the	internal	control system,	although	each	individual	within	an	organization	must	take	part	in	this process. There	are	two	key	aspects	that	controls	should	address: ·	What	should	be	achieved ·	What	should	be	avoided Internal	controls	address	business/operational	objectives	and	should	also	address undesired	events	through	prevention,	detection	and	correction. Elements	of	controls	that	should	be	considered	when	evaluating	control	strength are	classified	as	preventive,	detective	or	corrective	in	nature. Figure	1.5 describes	control	classifications,	functions	and	usages. Note: A	CISA	candidate	should	understand	the	purpose	of	and	differences between	preventive,	detective	and	corrective	controls	and	be	able	to	recognize examples	of	each.

## 1.3.1	CONTROL	OBJECTIVES	AND	CONTROL

## MEASURES

A	control	objective	is	defined	as	an	objective	of	one	or	more	operational	area(s) or	role(s)	to	be	achieved	in	order	to	contribute	to	the	fulfillment	of	strategic goal(s)	of	the	company.	That	is,	the	control	objective	is	such	a	goal	that	is explicitly	related	to	the	strategy	of	the	company. Control	objectives	are	statements	of	the	desired	result	or	purpose	to	be	achieved

by	implementing	control	activities	(procedures).	For	example,	control	objectives

may	relate	to	the	following	concepts: ·	Effectiveness	and	efficiency	of	operations

## Figure	1.5-Control	Classifications Class Function Examples

Preventive ·	Detect	problems	before	they	arise ·	Employing	only	qualified	personnel ·	Monitor	both	operation	and	inputs ·	Segregation	of	duties ·	Attempt	to	predict	potential	problems ·	Controlling	access	to	physical	facilities before	they	occur	and	make ·	Well-designed	documents	to	prevent adjustments errors ·	Prevent	an	error,	omission	or	malicious ·	Suitable	procedures	for	authorization	of act	from	occurring transactions ·	Programmed	edit	checks ·	Use	of	access	control	software	that allows	only	authorized	personnel	to access	sensitive	files ·	Use	of	encryption	software	to	prevent unauthorized	disclosure	of	data Detective ·	Use	controls	that	detect	and	report	the ·	Hash	totals occurrence	of	an	error,	omission	or ·	Check	points	in	production	jobs malicious	act ·	Echo	controls	in	telecommunications ·	Error	messages	over	tape	labels ·	Duplicate	checking	of	calculations

·	Periodic	performance	reporting	with variances ·	Past-due	account	reports ·	Internal	audit	functions ·	Review	of	activity	logs	to	detect unauthorized	access	attempts ·	Secure	code	reviews ·	Software	quality	assurance Corrective ·	Minimize	the	impact	of	a	threat ·	Contingency/continuity	of	operations ·	Remedy	problems	discovered	by planning detective	controls ·	Disaster	recovery	planning ·	Identify	the	cause	of	a	problem ·	Incident	response	planning ·	Correct	errors	arising	from	a	problem ·	Backup	procedures ·	Modify	the	processing	system(s)	to ·	System	break/fix	service	level minimize	future	occurrences	of	the agreements problem ·	Reliability	of	financial	reporting ·	Compliance	with	applicable	laws	and	regulations ·	Safeguarding	assets Control	objectives	apply	to	all	controls,	whether	they	are	manual,	automated	or	a combination	(e.g.,	review	of	system	logs).	Control	objectives	in	an	IS environment	do	not	differ	from	those	in	a	manual	environment;	however,	the way	these	controls	are	implemented	may	be	different.	Thus,	control	objectives need	to	be	addressed	relevant	to	specific	IS-related	processes. A	control	measure	is	defined	as	an	activity	contributing	to	the	fulfillment	of	a control	objective.	Both	the	control	objective	and	control	measure	serve	the decomposition	of	the	strategic-level	goals	into	such	lower-level	goals	and activities	that	can	be	assigned	as	tasks	to	the	staff.	This	assignment	can	take	the form	of	a	role	description	in	a	job	description.

## IS	Control	Objectives

IS	control	objectives	provide	a	complete	set	of	high-level	requirements	to	be considered	by	management	for	effective	control	of	each	IT	process	area.	IS control	objectives	are: ·	Statements	of	the	desired	result	or	purpose	to	be	achieved	by	implementing controls	around	information	systems	processes ·	Comprised	of	policies,	procedures,	practices	and	organizational	structures ·	Designed	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	business	objectives	will	be achieved	and	undesired	events	will	be	prevented,	or	detected	and	corrected Organizational	management	needs	to	make	choices	relative	to	these	control objectives	by	doing	the	following:

- Selecting	those	that	are	applicable
- Deciding	on	those	that	will	be	implemented
- Choosing	how	to	implement	them	(frequency,	span,	automation,	etc.)
- Accepting	the	risk	of	not	implementing	those	that	may	apply

Specific	IS	control	objectives	include	the	following:

- Safeguarding	assets:	information	on	automated	systems	being	up	to	date	and secure	from	improper	access
- Ensuring	system	development	life	cycle	(SDLC)	processes	are	established,	in place	and	operating	effectively	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	business, financial	and/or	industrial	software	systems	and	applications	are	developed	in	a repeatable	and	reliable	manner	to	assure	business	objectives	are	met
- Ensuring	integrity	of	general	OS	environments,	including	network	management and	operations
- Ensuring	integrity	of	sensitive	and	critical	application	system	environments, including	accounting/financial	and	management	information	(information objectives)	and	customer	data,	through:
- Authorization	of	the	input.	Each	transaction	is	authorized	and	entered	only once.
- Validation	of	the	input.	Each	input	is	validated	and	will	not	cause	negative impact	to	the	processing	of	transactions.
- Accuracy	and	completeness	of	processing	of	transactions.	All

transactions	are	recorded	accurately	and	entered	into	the	system	for	the	proper period.

- Reliability	of	overall	information	processing	activities
- Accuracy,	completeness	and	security	of	the	output
- Database	confidentiality,	integrity	and	availability ·	Ensuring	appropriate	identification	and	authentication	of	users	of	IS resources	(end	users	as	well	as	infrastructure	support) ·	Ensuring	the	efficiency	and	effectiveness	of	operations	(operational	objectives) ·	Complying	with	users'	requirements,	organizational	policies	and	procedures, and	applicable	laws	and	regulations	(compliance	objectives) ·	Ensuring	availability	of	IT	services	by	developing	efficient	business	continuity plans	(BCPs)	and	disaster	recovery	plans	(DRPs)	that	include	backup	and recovery	processes ·	Enhancing	protection	of	data	and	systems	by	developing	an	incident	response plan ·	Ensuring	integrity	and	reliability	of	systems	by	implementing	effective	change management	procedures ·	Ensuring	that	outsourced	IS	processes	and	services	have	clearly	defined	service
- level	agreements	(SLAs)	and	contract	terms	and	conditions	to	ensure	the organization's	assets	are	properly	protected	and	meet	business	goals	and objectives
- 1.3.2	EVALUATION	OF	THE	CONTROL	ENVIRONMENT

An	IS	auditor	reviews	evidence	gathered	during	the	audit	to	determine	if	the operations	reviewed	are	well	controlled	and	effective.	This	is	also	an	area	that requires	judgment	and	experience.	An	IS	auditor	also	assesses	the	strengths	and weaknesses	of	the	controls	evaluated	and	determines	if	they	are	effective	in meeting	the	control	objectives	established	as	part	of	the	audit	planning	process. A	control	matrix	is	often	used	in	assessing	the	proper	level	of	controls. Known	types	of	errors	that	can	occur	in	an	area	under	review	are	placed	on	the top	axis	of	the	matrix	and	known	controls	to	detect	or	correct	errors	are	placed on	the	side	axis	of	the	matrix.	Then,	using	a	ranking	method,	the	matrix	is	filled with	the	appropriate	measurements.	When	completed,	the	matrix	illustrates	areas where	controls	are	weak	or	lacking. In	some	instances,	a	strong	control	may	compensate	for	a	weak	control	in another	area.	For	example,	if	an	IS	auditor	finds	weaknesses	in	a	system's transaction	error	report,	a	detailed	manual	balancing	process	over	all	transactions may	be	in	place	to	compensate	for	the	weaknesses	in	the	error	report.	An	IS auditor	should	be	aware	of	compensating	controls	in	areas	where	controls	have been	identified	as	weak. While	a	compensating	control	situation	occurs	when	one	stronger	control supports	a	weaker	one,	overlapping	controls	are	two	strong	controls.	For example,	if	a	data	center	employs	a	card	key	system	to	control	physical	access and	a	guard	inside	the	door	requires	employees	to	show	their	card	key	or	badge, an	overlapping	control	exists.	Either	control	might	be	adequate	to	restrict	access, but	the	two	complement	each	other. Normally,	a	control	objective	will	not	be	achieved	by	considering	one	control adequate.	Rather,	an	IS	auditor	will	perform	a	variety	of	testing	procedures	and evaluate	how	these	relate	to	one	another. Generally,	a	group	of	controls,	when	aggregated	together,	may	act	as compensating	controls,	and	thereby	minimize	the	risk.	An	IS	auditor	should always	review	for	compensating	controls	prior	to	reporting	a	control	weakness. An	IS	auditor	may	not	find	each	control	procedure	to	be	in	place	but	should evaluate	the	comprehensiveness	of	controls	by	considering	the	strengths	and weaknesses	of	control	procedures.

- 1.3.3	GENERAL	CONTROLS

General	controls	apply	to	all	areas	of	an	organization	and	include	the	following: ·	Internal	accounting	controls	that	are	primarily	directed	at	accounting	operations -controls	that	concern	the	safeguarding	of	assets	and	reliability	of	financial records ·	Operational	controls	that	concern	day-to-day	operations,	functions	and activities,	and	ensure	that	the	operation	is	meeting	the	business	objectives

- Administrative	controls	that	concern	operational	efficiency	in	a	functional	area

and	adherence	to	management	policies	(administrative	controls	support	the operational	controls	specifically	concerned	with	these	areas) ·	Organizational	security	policies	and	procedures	to	ensure	proper	usage	of assets ·	Overall	policies	for	the	design	and	use	of	adequate	documents	and	records (manual/automated)	to	help	ensure	proper	recording	of	transactionstransactional	audit	trail ·	Procedures	and	practices	to	ensure	adequate	safeguards	over	access	to	and	use of	assets	and	facilities ·	Physical	and	logical	security	policies	for	all	facilities,	data	centers	and	IT

resources	(e.g.,	servers	and	telecom	infrastructure)

## 1.3.4	IS-SPECIFIC	CONTROLS

Each	general	control	can	be	translated	into	an	IS-specific	control.	A	welldesigned	information	system	should	have	controls	built	in	for	all	its	sensitive	or critical	functions.	For	example,	the	general	procedure	to	ensure	that	adequate safeguards	over	access	to	assets	and	facilities	can	be	translated	into	an	IS-related set	of	control	procedures,	covering	access	safeguards	over	computer	programs, data	and	equipment. IS	control	procedures	include: ·	Strategy	and	direction	of	the	IT	function ·	General	organization	and	management	of	the	IT	function ·	Access	to	IT	resources,	including	data	and	programs ·	Systems	development	methodologies	and	change	control ·	Operations	procedures

- Systems	programming	and	technical	support	functions

·	Quality	assurance	(QA)	procedures ·	Physical	access	controls ·	BCP/DRP ·	Networks	and	communication	technology	(e.g.,	local	area	networks,	wide	area networks,	wireless) ·	Database	administration ·	Protection	and	detective	mechanisms	against	internal	and	external	attacks Note: A	CISA	candidate	should	understand	concepts	regarding	IS	controls	and

how	to	apply	them	in	planning	an	audit. 1.4	RISK-BASED	AUDIT	PLANNING Risk-based	audit	planning	is	the	deployment	of	audit	resources	to	areas	within	an organization	that	represent	the	greatest	risk.	It	requires	an	understanding	of	the organization	and	its	environment,	specifically: ·	External	and	internal	factors	affecting	the	organization ·	The	organization's	selection	and	application	of	policies	and	procedures ·	The	organization's	objectives	and	strategies ·	Measurement	and	review	of	the	organization's	performance As	part	of	obtaining	this	understanding,	an	IS	auditor	must	also	gain	an understanding	of	the	key	components	of	the	organization's: ·	Strategy	management ·	Business	products	and	services ·	Corporate	governance	process ·	Transaction	types,	transaction	partners	and	transaction	flows	within information	systems Effective	risk-based	auditing	uses	risk	assessment	to	drive	the	audit	plan	and minimize	the	audit	risk	during	the	execution	of	an	audit. A	risk-based	audit	approach	is	used	to	assess	risk	and	to	assist	an	IS	auditor	in making	the	decision	to	perform	either	compliance	testing	or	substantive	testing. It	is	important	to	stress	that	the	risk-based	audit	approach	efficiently	assists	an	IS auditor	in	determining	the	nature	and	extent	of	testing. Within	this	concept,	inherent	risk,	control	risk	or	detection	risk	should	not	be	of major	concern,	despite	some	weaknesses.	In	a	risk-based	audit	approach,	IS auditors	are	not	just	relying	on	risk;	they	also	rely	on	internal	and	operational controls	as	well	as	knowledge	of	the	organization	or	the	business. This	type	of	risk	assessment	decision	can	help	relate	the	cost-benefit	analysis	of the	control	to	the	known	risk,	allowing	practical	choices. Business	risk	includes	concerns	about	the	probable	effects	of	an	uncertain	event on	achieving	established	business	objectives.	The	nature	of	business	risk	may	be financial,	regulatory	or	operational	and	may	also	include	risk	derived	from specific	technology.	For	example,	an	airline	company	is	subject	to	extensive safety	regulations	and	economic	changes,	both	of	which	impact	the	continuing operations	of	the	company.	In	this	context,	the	availability	of	IT	service	and	its reliability	are	critical.	Risk	also	includes	those	measures	an	organization	is willing	to	take	in	order	to	achieve	or	advance	their	objectives,	but	the	results may	be	unproven	or	uncertain. By	understanding	the	nature	of	the	business,	an	IS	auditor	can	identify	and categorize	the	types	of	risk	that	will	better	determine	the	risk	model	or	approach in	conducting	the	audit.	The	risk	model	assessment	can	be	as	simple	as	creating weights	for	the	types	of	risk	associated	with	the	business	and	identifying	the	risk in	an	equation.	On	the	other	hand,	risk	assessment	can	be	a	scheme	where	risk has	been	given	elaborate	weights	based	on	the	nature	of	the	business	or	the significance	of	the	risk.	A	simplistic	overview	of	a	risk-based	audit	approach	can be	seen	in figure	1.6 .

- 1.4.1	AUDIT	RISK	AND	MATERIALITY

Audit	risk	can	be	defined	as	the	risk	that	information	collected	may	contain	a material	error	that	may	go	undetected	during	the	course	of	the	audit.	An	IS

auditor	should	also	consider,	if	applicable,	other	factors	relevant	to	the organization:	customer	data,	privacy,	availability	of	provided	services,	and corporate	and	public	image,	as	in	the	case	of	public	organizations	or	foundations. Audit	risk	is	influenced	by: · Inherent	risk -As	it	relates	to	audit	risk,	it	is	the	risk	level	or	exposure	of	the process/entity	to	be	audited	without	considering	the	controls	that	management has	implemented.	Inherent	risk	exists	independent	of	an	audit	and	can	occur because	of	the	nature	of	the	business. · Control	risk -The	risk	that	a	material	error	exists	that	would	not	be	prevented or	detected	on	a	timely	basis	by	the	system	of	internal	controls. For	example,	the	control	risk	associated	with	manual	reviews	of	computer	logs can	be	high	because	activities	requiring	investigation	are	often	easily	missed	due to	the	volume	of	logged	information.	The	control	risk	associated	with computerized	data	validation	procedures	is	ordinarily	low	if	the	processes	are consistently	applied. · Detection	risk -The	risk	that	material	errors	or	misstatements	that	have occurred	will	not	be	detected	by	an	IS	auditor. · Overall	audit	risk -The	probability	that	information	or	financial	reports	may contain	material	errors	and	that	the	auditor	may	not	detect	an	error	that	has occurred.	An	objective	in	formulating	the	audit	approach	is	to	limit	the	audit	risk in	the	area	under	scrutiny	so	the	overall	audit	risk	is	at	a sufficiently	low	level	at	the	completion	of	the	examination. An	internal	control	weakness	or	set	of	combined	internal	control	weaknesses may	leave	an	organization	highly	susceptible	to	the	occurrence	of	a	threat	(e.g., financial	loss,	business	interruption,	loss	of	customer	trust,	economic	sanction). An	IS	auditor	should	be	concerned	with	assessing	the	materiality	of	the	items	in question	through	a	risk-based	audit	approach	to	evaluating	internal	controls. An	IS	auditor	should	have	a	good	understanding	of	audit	risk	when	planning	an audit.	An	audit	sample	may	not	detect	every	potential	error	in	a	population. However,	by	using	proper	statistical	sampling	procedures	or	a	strong	quality control	process,	the	probability	of	detection	risk	can	be	reduced	to	an	acceptable level. Similarly,	when	evaluating	internal	controls,	an	IS	auditor	should	realize	that	a given	system	may	not	detect	a	minor	error.	However,	that	specific	error, combined	with	others,	could	become	material	to	the	overall	system. Note: A	CISA	candidate	should	understand	audit	risk	and	not	confuse	it	with statistical	sampling	risk,	which	is	the	risk	that	incorrect	assumptions	are	made about	the	characteristics	of	a	population	from	which	a	sample	is	selected.

| Figure 1.6-Risk-based Audit Approach                                                          |                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| GatherInformationandPlan                                                                      |                                                                                                    |
| ·Knowledge of business and industry ·Prior year's audit results ·Recent financial information | ·Regulatory statutes ·Inherent risk assessments                                                    |
| Obtain Understanding of Internal Control                                                      |                                                                                                    |
| ·Control environment ·Control procedures ·Detectionriskassessment                             | ·Control risk assessment ·Equate total risk                                                        |
| Perform Compliance Tests                                                                      |                                                                                                    |
| ·Identify key controls to be tested.                                                          | ·Perform tests onreliability,risk prevention and adherence to organizationpolicies and procedures. |
| PerformSubstantiveTests                                                                       |                                                                                                    |
| ·Analytical procedures ·Detailedtestsofaccountbalances                                        | ·Other substantive audit procedures                                                                |
| Conclude the Audit                                                                            |                                                                                                    |
| ·Createrecommendations.                                                                       | ·Write audit report.                                                                               |

Note: For	further	guidance,	see	standard	1204	Materiality	and	guideline	2204 Materiality.

## 1.4.2	RISK	ASSESSMENT

An	IS	auditor	should	understand	how	the	organization	being	audited	approaches risk	assessment.	Risk	assessments	should	identify,	quantify	and	prioritize	risk against	criteria	for	risk	acceptance	and	objectives	relevant	to	the	organization. The	results	should	guide	and	determine	the	appropriate	management	action, priorities	for	managing	information	security	risk	and	priorities	for	implementing

controls	selected	to	protect	against	risk. Risk	assessments	should	be	performed	periodically	to	address	changes	in	the environment,	security	requirements,	and	the	risk	situation	(e.g.,	in	the	assets, threats,	vulnerabilities,	impacts),	and	when	significant	changes	occur.	These should	be	performed	methodically	and	be	capable	of	producing	comparable	and reproducible	results. The	scope	of	a	risk	assessment	can	be	the	entire	organization;	parts	of	the organization;	an	individual	information	system;	specific	system	components;	or services	where	this	is	practicable,	realistic	and	helpful. In	order	to	address	risk,	an	organization	should	establish	the	criteria	for determining	whether	risk	can	be	managed	within	the	risk	appetite.	Risk	may	be accepted	if,	for	example,	it	is	assessed	that	the	risk	is	low	or	the	cost	of	treatment is	not	cost-effective	for	the	organization.	Such	decisions	should	be	recorded. Risk	identified	in	the	risk	assessment	needs	to	be	treated.	Possible	risk	response options	include: · Risk	mitigation -Applying	appropriate	controls	to	reduce	the	risk · Risk	acceptance -Knowingly	and	objectively	not	taking	action,	provided	the risk	clearly	satisfies	the	organization's	policy	and	criteria	for	risk	acceptance · Risk	avoidance -Avoiding	risk	by	not	allowing	actions	that	would	cause	the risk	to	occur · Risk	sharing	(transfer) -Transferring	the	associated	risk	to	other	parties	(e.g., insurers	or	suppliers) For	risk	for	which	the	risk	treatment	option	is	to	apply	appropriate	controls, controls	should	be	selected	to	ensure	that	risk	is	reduced	to	an	acceptable	level, considering	the	following: ·	Requirements	and	constraints	of	national	and	international	legislation	and regulations ·	Organizational	objectives ·	Operational	requirements	and	constraints ·	Cost-effectiveness	(the	need	to	balance	the	investment	in	implementation	and operation	of	controls	against	the	harm	likely	to	result	from	security	failures) From	an	IS	auditor's	perspective,	risk	assessment	serves	several	purposes: ·	Assisting	an	IS	auditor	in	identifying	risk	and	threats	to	an	IT	environment	and IS	system-risk	and	threats	that	would	need	to	be	addressed	by	managementand	in	identifying	system-specific	internal	controls.

Depending	on	the	level	of	risk,	this	assists	an	IS	auditor	in	selecting	certain

<!-- image -->

areas	to	examine.

- Helping	an	IS	auditor	in	the	evaluation	of	controls	in	audit	planning
- Assisting	an	IS	auditor	in	determining	audit	objectives
- Supporting	risk-based	audit	decision	making

Figure	1.7 depicts	the	specific	processes	used	by	an	IS	auditor	to	realize	these objectives.

Source:	National	Institute	of	Standards	and	Technology	(NIST), NIST	Special Publication	800-30, Revision	1:	Information	Security ,	USA,	2012.	Reprinted courtesy	of	the	National	Institute	of	Standards	and	Technology,	U.S.	Department of	Commerce.	Not	copyrightable	in	the	United	States.

When	developing	the	overall	IS	audit	plan,	a	suitable	risk	assessment	approach should	be	followed.	To	correctly	and	completely	assess	the	risk	that	is	related	to the	complete	scope	of	the	IS	audit	area,	an	IS	auditor	should	consider	the following	elements	when	developing	the	IS	audit	plan:

- Full	coverage	of	all	areas	within	the	scope	of	the	IS	audit	universe,	which represents	the	range	of	all	possible	audit	activities
- Reliability	and	suitability	of	the	risk	assessment	provided	by	management
- The	processes	followed	by	management	to	supervise,	examine	and	report possible	risk	or	issues
- Coverage	of	risk	in	related	activities	relevant	to	the	activities	under	review
- 1.4.3	IS	AUDIT	RISK	ASSESSMENT	TECHNIQUES

When	determining	which	functional	areas	should	be	audited,	an	IS	auditor	may face	a	large	variety	of	audit	subjects.	Each	of	these	subjects	may	represent different	types	of	risk.	An	IS	auditor	should	evaluate	these	various	risk candidates	to	determine	the	high-risk	areas	that	should	be	audited. There	are	many	risk	assessment	methodologies	from	which	an	IS	auditor	may choose.	These	range	from	simple	classifications	based	on	the	IS	auditor's judgment	of	high,	medium	and	low,	to	complex	scientific	calculations	that provide	a	numeric	risk	rating. One	such	risk	assessment	approach	is	a	scoring	system	that	is	useful	in prioritizing	audits	based	on	an	evaluation	of	risk	factors.	The	system	considers variables	such	as	technical	complexity,	level	of	control	procedures	in	place	and level	of	financial	loss.	These	variables	may	or	may	not	be	weighted.	The	risk values	are	then	compared	to	each	other,	and	audits	are	scheduled	accordingly. Another	form	of	risk	assessment	is	subjective,	in	which	an	independent	decision is	made	based	on	business	knowledge,	executive	management	directives, historical	perspectives,	business	goals	and	environmental	factors.

A	combination	of	techniques	can	be	used.	Risk	assessment	methods	may	change and	develop	over	time	to	best	serve	the	needs	of	the	organization.	An	IS	auditor should	consider	the	level	of	complexity	and	detail	appropriate	for	the organization	being	audited.

Using	risk	assessment	to	determine	areas	to	be	audited	results	in	the	following outcomes: ·	Enabling	audit	management	to	effectively	allocate	limited	audit	resources ·	Ensuring	that	relevant	information	has	been	obtained	from	all	levels	of management,	including	boards	of	directors,	IS	auditors	and	functional	area management.	Generally,	this	information	assists	management	in	effectively discharging	its	responsibilities	and	ensures	that	the	audit	activities	are	directed	to high-risk	areas,	which	will	add	value	for	management. ·	Establishing	a	basis	for	effectively	managing	the	audit	department ·	Providing	a	summary	of	how	the	individual	audit	subject	is	related	to	the

- overall	organization	as	well	as	to	the	business	plans
- 1.4.4	RISK	ANALYSIS

Risk	analysis	is	a	subset	of	risk	assessment	and	is	used	during	audit	planning	to help	identify	risk	and	vulnerabilities	so	an	IS	auditor	can	determine	the	controls needed	to	mitigate	risk.	Risk	assessment	procedures	provide	a	basis	for	the identification	and	assessment	of	risk	of	material	vulnerabilities;	however,	they do	not	provide	sufficient	appropriate	audit	evidence	on	which	to	base	the	audit opinion. In	evaluating	IT-related	business	processes	applied	by	an	organization,	it	is important	to	understand	the	relationship	between	risk	and	control.	IS	auditors must	be	able	to	identify	and	differentiate	risk	types	and	the	controls	used	to mitigate	this	risk.	They	should	have	knowledge	of	common	business	risk	areas, related	technology	risk	and	relevant	controls.	They	should	also	be	able	to evaluate	the	risk	assessment	and	management	process	and	techniques	used	by business	managers,	and	to	make	assessments	of	risk	to	help	focus	and	plan	audit work.	In	addition	to	an	understanding	of	business	risk	and	control,	IS auditors	must	understand	that	risk	exists	within	the	audit	process. Risk	is	defined	as	the	combination	of	the	probability	of	an	event	and	its consequence (International	Organization	for	Standardization	[ISO]

31000:2009:	Risk	management-Principles	and	guidelines/ISO	Guide 73:2009: Risk	management-Vocabulary). Business	risk	may	negatively	impact	the	assets, processes	or	objectives	of	a	specific	business	or	organization.	An	IS	auditor	is often	focused	on	high-risk	issues	associated	with	the	confidentiality,	integrity	or availability	of	sensitive	and	critical	information	and	the	underlying	information systems	and	processes	that	generate,	store	and	manipulate	such	information.	In reviewing	these	types	of	IT-related	business	risk,	an	IS	auditor	will	often	assess

the	effectiveness	of	the	risk	management	process	an	organization	uses. In	analyzing	the	business	risk	arising	from	the	use	of	IT,	it	is	important	for	an	IS auditor	to	have	a	clear	understanding	of	the	following	aspects: ·	Industry	and/or	internationally	accepted	risk	management	processes ·	The	purpose	and	nature	of	business,	the	environment	in	which	the	business operates	and	related	business	risk ·	Dependence	on	technology	in	the	achievement	of	business	goals	and	objectives ·	The	business	risk	of	using	IT	and	how	it	impacts	the	achievement	of	the business	goals	and	objectives ·	A	good	overview	of	the	business	processes	and	the	impact	of	IT	and	related risk	on	the	business	process	objectives The	risk	assessment	process	is	an	iterative	life	cycle	that	begins	with	identifying business	objectives;	information	assets;	and	the	underlying	systems	or information	resources	that	generate,	store,	use	or	manipulate	the	assets	(e.g., hardware,	software,	databases,	networks,	facilities,	people)	critical	to	achieving these	objectives.	Because	IT	risk	is	dynamic,	management	should	recognize	the need	for	and	establish	an	adaptive	IT	risk	management	process	that	supports	the business	risk	management	process.	As	a	result,	the	most	effort	can	be	directed toward	the	most	sensitive	or	critical	assets	to	the	organization.	Next,	a	risk assessment	is	performed	to	identify	vulnerabilities	and	threats	and	determine	the probability	of	occurrence	and	the	resulting	impact	and	additional	safeguards	that would	mitigate	this	impact	to	a	level	acceptable	to	management.

During	the	risk	mitigation	phase,	controls	are	identified	for	treating	the	identified risk.	These	controls	should	prevent	or	reduce	the	likelihood	of	a	risk	event

occurring,	detect	the	occurrence	of	a	risk	event,	minimize	the	impact	or	transfer the	risk	to	another	organization. The	assessment	of	countermeasures	should	be	performed	through	a	cost-benefit analysis	where	controls	are	selected	to	reduce	risk	to	a	level	acceptable	to management.	This	process	may	be	based	on	the	following: ·	The	cost	of	the	control	compared	to	the	benefit	of	minimizing	the	risk ·	Management's	risk	appetite	(i.e.,	the	level	of	residual	risk	that	management	is prepared	to	accept) ·	Preferred	risk-reduction	methods	(e.g.,	terminate	the	risk,	minimize	probability of	occurrence,	minimize	impact,	transfer	the	risk	via	insurance)	The	final	phase relates	to	monitoring	performance	levels	of	the	risk	being	managed,	identifying any	significant	changes	in	the	environment	that	would	trigger	a	risk reassessment,	warranting	changes	to	its	control	environment.	It	encompasses three	processes-risk	assessment,	risk	mitigation	and	risk	reevaluation-in determining	whether	risk	is	being	mitigated	to	a	level	acceptable	to	management. It	should	be	noted	that,	to	be	effective,	risk	assessment	should	be	an	ongoing process	in	an	organization	that	endeavors	to	continually	identify	and	evaluate risk	as	it	arises	and	evolves.	See figure	1.8 for	the	summary	of	the	risk	management	process.

<!-- image -->

## 1.5	TYPES	OF	AUDITS	AND	ASSESSMENTS

An	IS	auditor	should	understand	the	various	types	of	audits	that	can	be performed,	internally	or	externally,	and	the	basic	audit	procedures	associated with	each.	These	include: · IS	audit -An	IS	audit	is	designed	to	collect	and	evaluate	evidence	to determine	whether	an	information	system	and	related	resources	are	adequately safeguarded	and	protected;	maintain	data	and	system	integrity and	availability;	provide	relevant	and	reliable	information;	achieve organizational	goals	effectively;	consume	resources	efficiently;	and	have,	in effect,	internal	controls	that	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	business, operational	and	control	objectives	will	be	met	and	undesired	events	will	be prevented,	or	detected	and	corrected,	in	a	timely	manner. · Compliance	audit -A	compliance	audit	includes	specific	tests	of	controls	to demonstrate	adherence	to	specific	regulatory	or	industry-specific	standards	or practices.	These	audits	often	overlap	other	types	of	audits	but	may	focus	on particular	systems	or	data. · Financial	audit -A	financial	audit	assesses	the	accuracy	of	financial reporting.	A	financial	audit	will	often	involve	detailed,	substantive	testing, although	IS	auditors	are	increasingly	placing	more	emphasis	on	a	risk-	and control-based	audit	approach.	This	kind	of	audit	relates	to	financial	information integrity	and	reliability. · Operational	audit -An	operational	audit	is	designed	to	evaluate	the	internal control	structure	in	a	given	process	or	area.	An	IS	audit	of	application	controls	or logical	security	systems	are	examples	of	an	operational	audit. · Integrated	audit -There	are	a	number	of	different	types	of	integrated	audits, but	typically	an	integrated	audit	combines	financial	and	operational	audit	steps and	may	or	may	not	include	the	use	of	an	IS	auditor.	An	integrated	audit	is	also performed	to	assess	the	overall	objectives	within	an	organization,	related	to financial	information	and	assets'	safeguarding,	efficiency	and	compliance.	An integrated	audit	can	be	performed	by	external	or	internal	auditors	and	would include	compliance	tests	of	internal	controls	and	substantive	audit	steps.	See section	1.11,	Quality	Assurance	and	Improvement	of	the	Audit	Process,	for	more info. · Administrative	audit -An	administrative	audit	is	designed	to	assess	issues related	to	the	efficiency	of	operational	productivity	within	an	organization. · Specialized	audit -Many	different	types	of	specialized	audits	are	conducted. Within	the	category	of	IS	audit,	specialized	reviews	may	examine	areas	such	as fraud	or	services	performed	by	third	parties. -Third-party	service	audit -A	third-party	service	audit	addresses	the	audit	of outsourced	financial	and	business	processes	to	third-party	service	providers, which	may	operate	in	different	jurisdictions.	A	thirdparty	service	audit	issues	an	opinion	on	a	service	organization's	description	of controls	through	a	service	auditor's	report,	which	then	can	be	used	by	the	IS auditor	of	the	entity	that	uses	the	services	of	the	service	organization. -Fraud	audit -A	fraud	audit	is	a	specialized	audit	designed	to	discover fraudulent	activity.	Auditors	often	use	specific	tools	and	data	analysis	techniques to	discover	fraud	schemes	and	business	irregularities. -Forensic	audit -A	forensic	audit	is	a	specialized	audit	to	discover,	disclose and	follow	up	on	fraud	and	crime.	The	primary	purpose	of	such	an	audit	is	the development	of	evidence	for	review	by	law	enforcement	and	judicial	authorities. · Computer	forensic	audit -A	computer	forensic	audit	is	an	investigation	that includes	the	analysis	of	electronic	devices	such	as	computers,	smartphones, disks,	switches,	routers	and	hubs.	An	IS	auditor	possessing	the	necessary	skills can	assist	an	information	security	manager	or	forensic	specialist	in	performing forensic	investigations	and	conduct	an	audit	of	the	system	to	ensure	compliance with	the	evidence	collection	procedures	for	forensic	investigation. · Functional	audit -A	functional	audit	provides	an	independent	evaluation	of software	products,	verifying	that	its	configuration	items'	actual	functionality	and performance	are	consistent	with	the	requirement	specifications.	Specifically,	this audit	is	held	prior	to	the	software	delivery	or	after	implementation.

## PART	B:	EXECUTION

Once	an	audit	is	planned	and	the	scope	and	objectives	are	defined,	the	IS auditor	is	ready	to	execute	the	audit	plan.	The	following	sections	provide guidance	for	executing	an	audit.

## 1.6	AUDIT	PROJECT	MANAGEMENT

Several	steps	are	required	to	perform	an	audit.	Adequate	planning	is	a	necessary first	step	in	performing	effective	IS	audits.	To	efficiently	use	IS audit	resources,	audit	organizations	must	assess	the	overall	risk	for	the	general and	application	areas	and	related	services	being	audited,	and	then	develop	an audit	program	that	consists	of	objectives	and	audit	procedures	to	satisfy	the	audit objectives.	The	audit	process	requires	an	IS	auditor	to	gather	evidence,	evaluate the	strengths	and	weaknesses	of	controls	based	on	the	evidence	gathered	through audit	tests,	and	prepare	an	audit	report	that	presents	to	management	those	issues (i.e.,	areas	of	control	weaknesses	with	recommendations	for	remediation)	in	an objective	manner. Audit	management	must	ensure	the	availability	of	adequate	audit	resources	and	a schedule	for	performing	the	audits	and,	in	the	case	of	internal	IS	audit,	for follow-up	reviews	on	the	status	of	corrective	actions	taken	by	management.	The process	of	auditing	includes	defining	the	audit	scope,	formulating	audit objectives,	identifying	audit	criteria,	performing	audit	procedures,	reviewing	and evaluating	evidence,	forming	audit	conclusions	and	opinions,	and	reporting	to management	after	discussion	with	key	process	owners. Project	management	techniques	for	managing	and	administering	audit	projects include	the	following	basic	steps: · Plan	the	audit	engagement -Plan	the	audit,	considering	project-specific	risk. · Build	the	audit	plan -Chart	out	the	necessary	audit	tasks	across	a timeline,	optimizing	resource	use.	Make	realistic	estimates	of	the	time requirements	for	each	task	with	proper	consideration	given	to	the	availability	of the	auditee. · Execute	the	plan -Execute	audit	tasks	against	the	plan. · Monitor	project	activity -Report	actual	progress	against	planned	audit	steps to	ensure	challenges	are	managed	proactively	and	the	scope	is	completed	within time	and	budget.

- 1.6.1	AUDIT	OBJECTIVES

Audit	objectives	refer	to	the	specific	goals	that	must	be	accomplished	by	the audit.	In	contrast,	a	control	objective	refers	to	how	an	internal	control	should function.	An	audit	generally	incorporates	several	audit	objectives. Audit	objectives	often	focus	on	confirming	that	internal	controls	exist	to minimize	business	risk	and	they	function	as	expected.	These	audit	objectives include	assuring	compliance	with	legal	and	regulatory	requirements	as	well	as the	confidentiality,	integrity,	reliability	and	availability	of	information	and	IT resources.	Audit	management	may	give	an	IS	auditor	a	general	control	objective to	review	and	evaluate	when	performing	an	audit. A	key	element	in	planning	an	IS	audit	is	to	translate	basic	and	wide-ranging audit	objectives	into	specific	IS	audit	objectives.	For	example,	in	a financial/operational	audit,	a	control	objective	could	be	to	ensure	that transactions	are	properly	posted	to	the	general	ledger	accounts.	However,	in	an IS	audit,	the	objective	could	be	extended	to	ensure	that	editing	features	are	in place	to	detect	errors	in	the	coding	of	transactions	that	may	impact	the	accountposting	activities. An	IS	auditor	must	understand	how	general	audit	objectives	can	be	translated into	specific	IS	control	objectives.	Determining	an	audit's	objectives	is	a	critical step	in	planning	an	IS	audit. One	of	the	primary	purposes	of	an	IS	audit	is	to	identify	control	objectives	and the	related	controls	that	address	the	objective.	For	example,	an	IS auditor's	initial	review	of	an	information	system	should	identify	key	controls. It	should	then	be	determined	whether	to	test	these	controls	for	compliance. An	IS	auditor	should	identify	both	key	general	and	application	controls	after developing	an	understanding	and	documenting	the	business	processes	and	the applications/functions	that	support	these	processes	and	general	support	systems. Based	on	that	understanding,	an	IS	auditor	should	identify	the	key	control	points. Alternatively,	an	IS	auditor	may	assist	in	assessing	the	integrity	of	financial reporting	data,	referred	to	as	substantive	testing,	through	CAATs.

- 1.6.2	AUDIT	PHASES

Each	phase	in	the	execution	of	an	audit	can	be	divided	into	key	steps	to	plan, define,	perform	and	report	the	results,	as	shown	in figure	1.9 . These	steps	can	be	further	broken	down	into	more	specific	activities,	as	shown	in figure	1.10 .

## 1.6.3	AUDIT	PROGRAMS

An	audit	program	is	a	step-by-step	set	of	audit	procedures	and	instructions	that should	be	performed	to	complete	an	audit.	It	is	based	on	the	scope	and	objective

of	the	particular	assignment. The	main	purposes	of	developing	an	audit	program	are	to	accomplish	the

- following: ·	Formal	documentation	of	audit	procedures	and	sequential	steps ·	Creation	of	procedures	that	are	repeatable	and	easy	to	use	by	internal	or external	audit	and	assurance	professionals	who	need	to	perform	similar	audits ·	Documentation	of	the	type	of	testing	that	will	be	used	(compliance	and/or substantive) ·	Meeting	generally	accepted	audit	standards	that	relate	to	the	planning	phase	in the	audit	process

An	IS	auditor	often	evaluates	IT	functions	and	systems	from	different perspectives,	such	as	security	(confidentiality,	integrity	and	availability),	quality (effectiveness,	efficiency),	fiduciary	(compliance,	reliability),	service	and capacity.	The	audit	work	program	is	the	audit	strategy	and	plan-it identifies	scope,	audit	objectives	and	audit	procedures	to	obtain	sufficient, relevant	and	reliable	evidence	to	draw	and	support	audit	conclusions	and opinions. Source:	ISACA, Information	Systems	Auditing:	Tools	and	Techniques-Creating

<!-- image -->

## Audit	Programs ,	USA,	2016

## Figure	1.10-Audit	Process	Activities	by	Step Audit	Step Description

1. Determine	audit	subject.

Identify	the	area	to	be	audited	(e.g.,	business	function,	system,	physical location).

2. Define	audit	objective.

Identify	the	purpose	of	the	audit.	For	example,	an	objective might	be	to	determine	whether	program	source	code	changes occur	in	a	well-defined	and	controlled	environment.

3. Set	audit	scope.

Identify	the	specific	systems,	function	or	unit	of	the	organization	to	be	included in	the	review.	For	example,	in	the	previous example	(program	changes),	the	scope	statement	might	limit	the review	to	a	single	application,	system	or	a	limited	period	of time. This	step	is	very	important	because	the	IS	auditor	will	need	to understand	the	IT	environment	and	its	components	to	identify the	resources	that	will	be	required	to	conduct	a	comprehensive evaluation.	A	clear	scope	will	help	the	IS	auditor	define	a	set	of	testing	points that	is	relevant	to	the	audit	and	further	determine	the	technical	skills	and resources	necessary	to	evaluate	different	technologies	and	their	components. 4.	Perform	preaudit	planning. ·	Conduct	a	risk	assessment,	which	is	critical	in	setting	the	final	scope	of	a	riskbased	audit.	For	other	types	of	audits	(e.g., compliance),	conducting	a	risk	assessment	is	a	good	practice because	the	results	can	help	the	IS	audit	team	to	justify	the engagement	and	further	refine	the	scope	and	preplanning focus. ·	Interview	the	auditee	to	inquire	about	activities	or	areas	of concern	that	should	be	included	in	the	scope	of	the engagement. ·	Identify	regulatory	compliance	requirements. ·	Once	the	subject,	objective	and	scope	are	defined,	the	audit team	can	identify	the	resources	that	will	be	needed	to	perform the	audit	work.	Some	of	the	resources	to	be	defined	follow:

- Technical	skills	and	resources	needed
- Budget	and	effort	needed	to	complete	the	engagement
- Locations	or	facilities	to	be	audited
- Roles	and	responsibilities	among	the	audit	team
- Time	frame	for	the	various	stages	of	the	audit
- Sources	of	information	for	test	or	review,	such	as	functional

flowcharts,	policies,	standards,	procedures	and	prior	audit work	papers

- Points	of	contact	for	administrative	and	logistics

arrangements

- A	communication	plan	that	describes	to	whom	to

communicate,	when,	how	often	and	for	what	purposes

5. Determine	audit	procedures

At	this	stage	of	the	audit	process,	the	audit	team	should	have and	steps	for	data	gathering. enough	information	to	identify	and	select	the	audit	approach	or strategy	and	start	developing	the	audit	program.	Some	of	the

- Identify	and	obtain	departmental	policies,	standards	and

specific	activities	in	this	step	are: guidelines	for	review.

- Identify	any	regulatory	compliance	requirements.
- Identify	a	list	of	individuals	to	interview.
- Identify	methods	(including	tools)	to	perform	the	evaluation.
- Develop	audit	tools	and	methodology	to	test	and	verify

controls.

- Develop	test	scripts.
- Identify	criteria	for	evaluating	the	test.
- Define	a	methodology	to	evaluate	that	the	test	and	its	results	are	accurate	(and repeatable	if	necessary).

## Source:	ISACA, Information	Systems	Auditing:	Tools	and	Techniques-

## Creating	Audit	Programs ,	USA,	2016

General	audit	procedures	are	the	basic	steps	in	the	performance	of	an	audit	and usually	include:

- Obtaining	and	recording	an	understanding	of	the	audit	area/subject
- Creating	a	risk	assessment	and	general	audit	plan	and	schedule
- Performing	detailed	audit	planning	that	includes	the	necessary	audit	steps	and	a breakdown	of	the	work	planned	across	an	anticipated	time	line
- Doing	a	preliminary	review	of	the	audit	area/subject
- Evaluating	the	audit	area/subject
- Verifying	and	evaluating	the	appropriateness	of	controls	designed	to	meet control	objectives
- Conducting	compliance	testing	(tests	of	the	implementation	of	controls	and their	consistent	application)
- Conducting	substantive	testing	(confirming	the	accuracy	of	information)
- Reporting	(communicating	results)
- Following	up	in	cases	where	there	is	an	internal	audit	function Minimum

## Skills	to	Develop	an	Audit	Program

Developing	meaningful	audit	and	assurance	programs	depends	on	the	ability	to customize	audit	procedures	according	to	the	nature	of	the	subject	under	review and	the	specific	risk	that	must	be	addressed	in	the	audit	area/organization.	The following	skills	can	assist	an	IS	auditor	in	creating	an	audit	program:

- Good	understanding	of	the	nature	of	the	enterprise	and	its	industry	to	identify and	categorize	the	types	of	risk	and	threat
- Good	understanding	of	the	IT	space	and	its	components	and	sufficient knowledge	of	the	technologies	that	affect	them
- Understanding	of	the	relationship	between	business	risk	and	IT	risk
- A	basic	knowledge	of	risk	assessment	practices
- Understanding	of	the	different	testing	procedures	for	evaluating	IS	controls	and identifying	the	best	method	of	evaluation,	for	example:
- The	use	of	generalized	audit	software	to	survey	the	contents	of	data	files	(e.g., system	logs,	user	access	list)
- The	use	of	specialized	software	to	assess	the	contents	of	operating	systems, databases	and	application	parameter	files
- Flowcharting	techniques	for	documenting	business	processes	and	automated controls
- The	use	of	audit	logs	and	reports	to	evaluate	parameters
- Review	of	documentation
- Inquiry	and	observations
- Walk-throughs
- Reperformance	of	controls

Note: For	additional	guidance,	see	standard	1203	Performance	and	Supervision and	guideline	2203	Performance	and	Supervision.

- 1.6.4	AUDIT	WORK	PAPERS

All	audit	plans,	programs,	activities,	tests,	findings	and	incidents	should	be properly	documented	in	work	papers.	The	format	and	media	of	work	papers	can vary,	depending	on	specific	needs	of	the	department.	IS	auditors	should particularly	consider	how	to	maintain	the	integrity	and	protection	of	audit	test evidence	in	order	to	preserve	its	value	as	substantiation	in	support	of	audit results. Work	papers	can	be	considered	the	bridge	or	interface	between	the	audit objectives	and	the	final	report.	Work	papers	should	provide	a	seamless	transition -with	traceability	and	support	for	the	work	performed-from	objectives	to report	and	from	report	to	objectives.	In	this	context,	the	audit	report	can	be viewed	as	a	particular	work	paper.

- 1.6.5	FRAUD,	IRREGULARITIES	AND	ILLEGAL	ACTS

Management	is	primarily	responsible	for	establishing,	implementing	and maintaining	an	internal	control	system	that	leads	to	the	deterrence	and/or	timely detection	of	fraud.	Internal	controls	may	fail	where	such	controls	are circumvented	by	exploiting	vulnerabilities	or	through	management-perpetrated weakness	in	controls	or	collusion	among	people. The	presence	of	internal	controls	does	not	altogether	eliminate	fraud.	IS auditors	should	observe	and	exercise	due	professional	care	in	all	aspects	of	their work	and	be	alert	to	the	possible	opportunities	that	allow	fraud	to	materialize. They	should	be	aware	of	the	possibility	and	means	of	perpetrating	fraud, especially	by	exploiting	the	vulnerabilities	and	overriding	controls	in	the	ITenabled	environment.	They	should	have	knowledge	of fraud	and	fraud	indicators	and	be	alert	to	the	possibility	of	fraud	and	errors	while performing	an	audit. During	the	course	of	regular	assurance	work,	an	IS	auditor	may	come	across instances	or	indicators	of	fraud.	After	careful	evaluation,	an	IS	auditor	may communicate	the	need	for	a	detailed	investigation	to	appropriate	authorities.

In	the	case	of	the	IS	auditor	identifying	a	major	fraud	or	if	the	risk	associated with	the	detection	is	high,	audit	management	should	also	consider communicating	in	a	timely	manner	to	the	audit	committee. Regarding	fraud	prevention,	an	IS	auditor	should	be	aware	of	potential	legal requirements	concerning	the	implementation	of	specific	fraud	detection procedures	and	reporting	fraud	to	appropriate	authorities. Note: For	additional	guidance,	see	standard	1207	Irregularity	and	Illegal	Acts and	guideline	2207	Irregularity	and	Illegal	Acts.

1.7	SAMPLING	METHODOLOGY

Valid	conclusions	can	be	reached	using	audit	sampling.	When	using	either statistical	or	nonstatistical	sampling	methods,	IS	auditors	should	design	and select	an	audit	sample,	perform	audit	procedures	and	evaluate	sample	results	to obtain	sufficient	and	appropriate	evidence	to	form	a	conclusion.	When	using sampling	methods	to	draw	a	conclusion	on	the	entire	population,	professionals should	use	statistical	sampling. An	IS	auditor	should	consider	the	purpose	of	the	sample: · Compliance	testing/test	of	controls -An	audit	procedure	designed	to	evaluate the	operating	effectiveness	of	controls	in	preventing,	or	detecting	and	correcting, material	weaknesses · Substantive	testing/test	of	details -An	audit	procedure	designed	to	detect material	weaknesses	at	the	assertion	level

## 1.7.1	COMPLIANCE	VERSUS	SUBSTANTIVE	TESTING

Compliance	testing	is	evidence	gathering	for	the	purpose	of	testing	an organization's	compliance	with	control	procedures.	This	differs	from	substantive testing	in	which	evidence	is	gathered	to	evaluate	the	integrity	of	individual transactions,	data	or	other	information. A	compliance	test	determines	whether	controls	are	being	applied	in	a	manner that	complies	with	management	policies	and	procedures.	For	example,	if	an	IS auditor	is	concerned	about	whether	production	program	library	controls	are working	properly,	the	IS	auditor	might	select	a	sample	of	programs	to	determine whether	the	source	and	object	versions	are	the	same.	The	broad	objective	of	any compliance	test	is	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	the	particular	control	as perceived	in	the	preliminary	evaluation. It	is	important	that	an	IS	auditor	understand	the	specific	objective	of	a compliance	test	and	of	the	control	being	tested.	Compliance	tests	can	be	used	to test	the	existence	and	effectiveness	of	a	defined	process,	which	may	include	a trail	of	documentary	and/or	automated	evidence-for	example,	to	provide assurance	that	only	authorized	modifications	are	made	to	production	programs. A	substantive	test	substantiates	the	integrity	of	actual	processing.	It	provides evidence	of	the	validity	and	integrity	of	the	balances	in	the	financial	statements and	the	transactions	that	support	these	balances.	An	IS	auditor	could	use substantive	tests	to	test	for	monetary	errors	directly	affecting	financial	statement balances	or	other	relevant	data	of	the	organization. Additionally,	an	IS	auditor	might	develop	a	substantive	test	to	test	the completeness	and	accuracy	of	report	data.	To	perform	this	test,	the	IS	auditor might	use	a	statistical	sample,	which	will	allow	the	IS	auditor	to	develop	a conclusion	regarding	the	accuracy	of	all	of	the	data. A	direct	correlation	exists	between	the	level	of	internal	controls	and	the	amount of	substantive	testing	required.	If	the	results	of	testing	controls	(compliance tests)	reveal	the	presence	of	adequate	internal	controls,	then	minimizing	the substantive	procedures	could	be	justified.	Conversely,	if	the	control	testing reveals	weaknesses	in	controls	that	may	raise	doubts	about	the	completeness, accuracy	or	validity	of	the	accounts,	substantive	testing	can	alleviate	those doubts. Examples	of	compliance	testing	of	controls	where	sampling	could	be	considered include	user	access	rights,	program	change	control	procedures,	documentation procedures,	program	documentation,	follow-up	of	exceptions,	review	of	logs	and software	license	audits. Examples	of	substantive	tests	where	sampling	could	be	considered	include performance	of	a	complex	calculation	(e.g.,	interest)	on	a	sample	of	accounts	or a	sample	of	transactions	to	vouch	for	supporting	documentation. An	IS	auditor	could	also	decide	during	the	preliminary	assessment	of	the controls	to	include	some	substantive	testing	if	the	results	of	this	preliminary evaluation	indicate	that	implemented	controls	are	not	reliable	or	do	not	exist. Figure	1.11 shows	the	relationship	between	compliance	and	substantive	tests and	describes	the	two	categories	of	substantive	tests. Note: A	CISA	candidate	should	be	knowledgeable	on	when	to	perform compliance	tests	or	substantive	tests.

## 1.7.2	SAMPLING

Sampling	is	performed	when	time	and	cost	considerations	preclude	a	total verification	of	all	transactions	or	events	in	a	predefined	population.	The population	consists	of	the	entire	group	of	items	that	need	to	be	examined.	The subset	of	population	members	used	to	perform	testing	is	called	a	sample. Sampling	is	used	to	infer	characteristics	about	a	population	based	on	the characteristics	of	a	sample. The	two	general	approaches	to	audit	sampling	are	statistical	and	nonstatistical: · Statistical	sampling -An	objective	method	of	determining	the	sample	size and	selection	criteria -	Statistical	sampling	uses	the	mathematical	laws	of	probability	to:	(1)	calculate the	sampling	size,	(2)	select	the	sample	items,	and	(3)	evaluate	the	sample	results and	make	the	inference.

- With	statistical	sampling,	an	IS	auditor	quantitatively	decides	how

<!-- image -->

| Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           | Figure 1.11-Understand the Control Environment andFlow of Transactions                           |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                  | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               | Reviewthesystemtoidentifycontrols.                                                               |
| Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          | Testcompliancetodeterminewhethercontrolsarefunctioning.                                          |
| Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. | Evaluatethecontrolstodeterminethebasisforreliance andthenature,scopeandtimingofsubstantivetests. |
| Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     | Usetwotypesofsubstantiveteststoevaluatethevalidityofthedata.                                     |
| Testbalancesandtransactions                                                                      | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 | Performanalyticreviewprocedures.                                                                 |

closely	the	sample	should	represent	the	population	(assessing	sample	precision) and	the	number	of	times	in	100	that	the	sample	should	represent	the	population (the	reliability	or	confidence	level).	This	assessment	is	represented	as	a percentage.	The	results	of	a	valid	statistical	sample	are	mathematically quantifiable. · Nonstatistical	sampling	(often	referred	to	as	judgmental	sampling) -Uses	audit	judgment	to	determine	the	method	of	sampling,	the	number	of	items that	will	be	examined	from	a	population	(sample	size)	and	which	items	to	select (sample	selection) -	These	decisions	are	based	on	subjective	judgment	as	to	which items/transactions	are	the	most	material	and	most	risky. When	using	either	statistical	or	nonstatistical	sampling	methods,	an	IS	auditor should	design	and	select	an	audit	sample,	perform	audit	procedures	and	evaluate sample	results	to	obtain	sufficient,	reliable,	relevant	and	useful	audit	evidence. These	methods	of	sampling	require	an	IS	auditor	to	use	judgment	when	defining the	population	characteristics	and,	thus,	are	subject	to	the	risk	that	incorrect conclusions	could	be	drawn	from	the	sample	(sampling	risk). However,	statistical	sampling	permits	an	IS	auditor	to	quantify	the	probability	of error	(confidence	coefficient).	To	be	a	statistical	sample,	each	item	in	the population	should	have	an	equal	opportunity	or	probability	of	being	selected. Within	these	two	general	approaches	to	audit	sampling,	there	are	two	primary methods	of	sampling	used-attribute	sampling	and	variable	sampling.	Attribute sampling,	generally	applied	in	compliance	testing,	deals with	the	presence	or	absence	of	the	attribute	and	provides	conclusions	that	are expressed	in	rates	of	incidence.	Variable	sampling,	generally	applied	in substantive	testing,	deals	with	population	characteristics	that	vary,	such	as monetary	values	and	weights	(or	any	other	measurement),	and	provides conclusions	related	to	deviations	from	the	norm. Attribute	sampling	refers	to	three	different,	but	related,	types	of	proportional sampling:

## · Attribute	sampling	(also	referred	to	as	fixed	sample-size	attribute

sampling	or	frequency-estimating	sampling) -A	sampling	model	that	is	used to	estimate	the	rate	(percent)	of	occurrence	of	a	specific	quality	(attribute)	in	a population.	Attribute	sampling	answers	the	question	of 'how	many?'	An	example	of	an	attribute	that	might	be	tested	is	approval signatures	on	computer	access	request	forms. · Stop-or-go	sampling -A	sampling	model	that	helps	prevent	excessive sampling	of	an	attribute	by	allowing	an	audit	test	to	be	stopped	at	the	earliest possible	moment.	Stop-or-go	sampling	is	used	when	an	IS	auditor	believes	that relatively	few	errors	will	be	found	in	a	population. · Discovery	sampling -A	sampling	model	most	often	used	when	the	objective of	the	audit	is	to	seek	out	(discover)	fraud,	circumvention	of	regulations	or	other irregularities.	For	example,	if	the	sample	is	found	to	be	error	free,	it	is	assumed that	no	fraud/irregularity	exists;	however,	if	a	single	error	is	found,	the	entire sample	is	believed	to	be fraudulent/irregular. Variable	sampling-also	known	as	dollar	estimation	or	mean	estimation sampling-is	a	technique	used	to	estimate	the	monetary	value	or	some	other	unit of	measure	(such	as	weight)	of	a	population	from	a	sample	portion.	An	example of	variable	sampling	is	a	review	of	an	organization's	balance	sheet	for	material transactions	and	an	application	review	of	the	program	that	produced	the	balance sheet. Variable	sampling	refers	to	three	types	of	quantitative	sampling	models: · Stratified	mean	per	unit -A	statistical	model	in	which	the	population	is divided	into	groups	and	samples	are	drawn	from	the	various	groups;	used	to produce	a	smaller	overall	sample	size	relative	to	unstratified	mean	per unit · Unstratified	mean	per	unit -A	statistical	model	in	which	a	sample	mean	is calculated	and	projected	as	an	estimated	total · Difference	estimation -A	statistical	model	used	to	estimate	the	total difference	between	audited	values	and	book	(unaudited)	values	based	on differences	obtained	from	sample	observations The	following	statistical	sampling	terms	need	to	be	understood: · Confidence	coefficient	(also	referred	to	as	confidence	level	or	reliability factor) -A	percentage	expression	(90	percent,	95	percent,	99	percent,	etc.)	of the	probability	that	the	characteristics	of	the	sample	are	a	true	representation	of the	population.	Generally,	a	95	percent	confidence	coefficient	is	considered	a high	degree	of	comfort.	If	an	IS	auditor	knows	internal	controls	are	strong,	the confidence	coefficient	may	be	lowered. The	greater	the	confidence	coefficient,	the	larger	the	sample	size. · Level	of	risk -Equal	to	one	minus	the	confidence	coefficient.	For	example,	if the	confidence	coefficient	is	95	percent,	the	level	of	risk	is	five	percent	(100 percent	minus	95	percent). · Precision -Set	by	an	IS	auditor,	it	represents	the	acceptable	range	difference between	the	sample	and	the	actual	population.	For	attribute	sampling,	this	figure is	stated	as	a	percentage.	For	variable	sampling,	this	figure	is	stated	as	a monetary	amount	or	a	number.	The	higher	the	precision	amount,	the	smaller	the sample	size	and	the	greater	the	risk	of	fairly	large	total	error	amounts	going undetected.	The	smaller	the	precision	amount,	the	greater	the	sample	size.	A very	low	precision	level	may	lead	to	an	unnecessarily	large	sample	size. · Expected	error	rate -An	estimate	stated	as	a	percent	of	the	errors	that	may exist.	The	greater	the	expected	error	rate,	the	greater	the	sample	size. This	figure	is	applied	to	attribute	sampling	formulas	but	not	to	variable	sampling formulas. · Sample	mean -The	sum	of	all	sample	values,	divided	by	the	size	of	the sample.	The	sample	mean	measures	the	average	value	of	the	sample. · Sample	standard	deviation -Computes	the	variance	of	the	sample	values from	the	mean	of	the	sample.	Sample	standard	deviation	measures	the	spread	or dispersion	of	the	sample	values. · Tolerable	error	rate -Describes	the	maximum	misstatement	or	number	of errors	that	can	exist	without	an	account	being	materially	misstated. Tolerable	rate	is	used	for	the	planned	upper	limit	of	the	precision	range	for compliance	testing.	The	term	is	expressed	as	a	percentage.	'Precision	range'	and 'precision'	have	the	same	meaning	when	used	in	substantive	testing. · Population	standard	deviation -A	mathematical	concept	that	measures	the relationship	to	the	normal	distribution.	The	greater	the	standard	deviation,	the larger	the	sample	size.	This	figure	is	applied	to	variable	sampling	formulas	but not	to	attribute	sampling	formulas. Key	steps	in	the	construction	and	selection	of	a	sample	for	an	audit	test	are	seen in figure	1.12 .

## Sampling	Risk

Sampling	risk	arises	from	the	possibility	that	an	IS	auditor's	conclusion	may	be different	from	the	conclusion	that	would	be	reached	if	the	entire	population	were subjected	to	the	same	audit	procedure.	There	are	two	types	of	sampling	risk: · The	risk	of	incorrect	acceptance -A	material	weakness	is	assessed	as unlikely	when,	in	fact,	the	population	is	materially	misstated. · The	risk	of	incorrect	rejection -A	material	weakness	is	assessed	as	likely when,	in	fact,	the	population	is	not	materially	misstated. Note: A	CISA	candidate	is	not	expected	to	be	a	sampling	expert. However,	a	CISA	candidate	should	have	a	foundational	understanding	of	the general	principles	of	sampling	and	how	to	design	a	sample	that	is	reliable.	A CISA	candidate	should	also	be	familiar	with	the	different	types	of	sampling terms	and	techniques	and	when	it	is	appropriate	to	use	each	technique.

1.8	AUDIT	EVIDENCE	COLLECTION	TECHNIQUES

Evidence	is	any	information	used	by	an	IS	auditor	to	determine	whether	the entity	or	data	being	audited	follows	the	established	criteria	or	objectives	and supports	audit	conclusions.	It	is	a	requirement	that	conclusions	be	based	on sufficient,	relevant	and	competent	evidence.	When	planning	the	IS	audit,	the type	of	audit	evidence	to	be	gathered,	its	use	as	audit	evidence	to	meet	audit objectives	and	its	varying	levels	of	reliability	should	be	considered. Audit	evidence	may	include: ·	An	IS	auditor's	observations	(presented	to	management) ·	Notes	taken	from	interviews ·	Results	of	independent	confirmations	obtained	by	an	IS	auditor	from	different stakeholders ·	Material	extracted	from	correspondence	and	internal	documentation	or contracts	with	external	partners ·	The	results	of	audit	test	procedures While	all	evidence	will	assist	an	IS	auditor	in	developing	audit	conclusions, some	types	of	evidence	are	more	reliable	than	others.	The	rules	of	evidence	and sufficiency	as	well	as	the	competency	of	evidence	must	be	considered	as required	by	audit	standards. Determinants	for	evaluating	the	reliability	of	audit	evidence	include: · Independence	of	the	provider	of	the	evidence -Evidence	obtained	from outside	sources	is	more	reliable	than	from	within	the	organization.	This	is	why confirmation	letters	are	used	for	verification	of	accounts	receivable	balances. Additionally,	signed	contracts	or	agreements	with	external	parties	could	be considered	reliable	if	the	original	documents	are	made	available	for	review. · Qualifications	of	the	individual	providing	the	information/evidence -Whether	the	providers	of	the	information/evidence	are	inside	or	outside	of	the organization,	an	IS	auditor	should	always	consider	the	qualifications	and functional	responsibilities	of	the	persons	providing	the	information. This	can	also	be	true	of	an	IS	auditor.	If	an	IS	auditor	does	not	have	a	good understanding	of	the	technical	area	under	review,	the	information	gathered	from testing	that	area	may	not	be	reliable,	especially	if	the	IS	auditor	does	not	fully understand	the	test.

<!-- image -->

## Source:	ISACA, Fundamentals	of	IS	Audit	and	Assurance	Training	Course , USA,	2014

· Objectivity	of	the	evidence -Objective	evidence	is	more	reliable	than evidence	that	requires	considerable	judgment	or	interpretation.	An	IS auditor's	review	of	media	inventory	is	direct,	objective	evidence.	An	IS auditor's	analysis	of	the	efficiency	of	an	application,	based	on	discussions	with certain	personnel,	may	not	be	objective	audit	evidence. · Timing	of	the	evidence -An	IS	auditor	should	consider	the	time	during	which information	exists	or	is	available	in	determining	the	nature,	timing	and	extent	of compliance	testing	and,	if	applicable,	substantive	testing.	For	example,	audit evidence	processed	by	dynamic	systems,	such	as spreadsheets,	may	not	be	retrievable	after	a	specified	period	of	time	if	changes	to the	files	are	not	controlled	or	the	files	are	not	backed	up. An	IS	auditor	gathers	a	variety	of	evidence	during	the	audit.	Some	evidence	may be	relevant	to	the	objectives	of	the	audit,	while	other	evidence	may	be considered	peripheral.	An	IS	auditor	should	focus	on	the	overall	objectives	of the	review	and	not	the	nature	of	the	evidence	gathered. The	quality	and	quantity	of	evidence	must	be	assessed.	These	two	characteristics are	referred	to	by	the	International	Federation	of	Accountants	(IFAC)	as competent	(quality)	and	sufficient	(quantity).	Evidence	is	competent	when	it	is both	valid	and	relevant.	Audit	judgment	is	used	to	determine	when	sufficiency	is achieved	in	the	same	manner	that	is	used	to	determine	the	competency	of evidence. An	understanding	of	the	rules	of	evidence	is	important	for	IS	auditors	because they	may	encounter	a	variety	of	evidence	types.

Note: A	CISA	candidate,	given	an	audit	scenario,	should	be	able	to	determine which	type	of	evidence-gathering	technique	would	be	best	in	a given	situation. The	following	are	techniques	for	gathering	evidence: · Reviewing	IS	organization	structures -An	organizational	structure	that provides	an	adequate	separation	or	segregation	of	duties	is	a	key	general	control in	an	IS	environment.	An	IS	auditor	should	understand	general	organizational controls	and	be	able	to	evaluate	these	controls	in	the	organization	under	audit. Where	there	is	a	strong	emphasis	on	cooperative	distributed	processing	or	on end-user	computing,	IT	functions	may	be	organized	somewhat	differently	from the	classic	IS	organization,	which	consists	of	separate	systems	and	operations functions.	An	IS	audit	and	assurance	should	be	able	to	review	these organizational	structures	and	assess	the	level	of	control	they	provide. · Reviewing	IS	policies	and	procedures -An	IS	auditor	should	review	whether appropriate	policies	and	procedures	are	in	place,	determine	whether	personnel understand	the	implemented	policies	and	procedures,	and	ensure	that	policies and	procedures	are	being	followed.	An	IS	auditor	should	verify	that	management assumes	full	responsibility	for	formulating,	developing,	documenting, promulgating	and	controlling	policies	covering	general	aims	and	directives. Periodic	reviews	of	policies	and	procedures	for	appropriateness	should	be carried	out. · Reviewing	IS	standards -An	IS	auditor	should	first	understand	the	existing standards	in	place	within	the	organization. · Reviewing	IS	documentation -A	first	step	in	reviewing	the	documentation for	an	information	system	is	to	understand	the	existing	documentation	in	place within	the	organization.	This	documentation	could	be	a	hard	copy	or	stored electronically.	If	the	latter	is	the	case,	controls	to	preserve	the	document	integrity should	be	evaluated	by	an	IS	auditor.	An	IS	auditor	should	look	for	a	minimum level	of	IS	documentation. Documentation	may	include: -	Systems	development	initiating	documents	(e.g.,	feasibility	study)

-	Documentation	provided	by	external	application	suppliers -	SLAs	with	external	IT	providers -	Functional	requirements	and	design	specifications -	Tests	plans	and	reports -	Program	and	operations	documents -	Program	change	logs	and	histories -	User	manuals -	Operations	manuals -	Security-related	documents	(e.g.,	security	plans,	risk	assessments) -	BCPs -	QA	reports -	Reports	on	security	metrics · Interviewing	appropriate	personnel -Interviewing	techniques	are	an important	skill	for	an	IS	auditor.	Interviews	should	be	organized	in	advance	with objectives	clearly	communicated,	follow	a	fixed	outline	and	be	documented	by interview	notes.	An	interview	form	or	checklist	prepared	by	an	IS	auditor	is	a good	approach.	Remember	that	the	purpose	of	such	an	interview	is	to	gather audit	evidence	using	techniques	such	as	inquiry,	observation,	inspection, confirmation,	performance	and	monitoring. Personnel	interviews	are	discovery	in	nature	and	should	never	be	accusatory;	the interviewer	should	help	people	feel	comfortable,	encouraging	them	to	share information,	ideas,	concerns	and	knowledge.	An	IS	auditor	should	verify	the accuracy	of	the	notes	with	the	interviewee. · Observing	processes	and	employee	performance -The	observation	of processes	is	a	key	audit	technique	for	many	types	of	review.	An	IS	auditor should	be	unobtrusive	while	making	observations	and	should	document everything	in	sufficient	detail	to	be	able	to	present	it,	if	required,	as	audit evidence.	In	some	situations,	the	release	of	the	audit	report	may	not	be	timely enough	to	use	this	observation	as	evidence.	This	may	necessitate	the	issuance	of an	interim	report	to	management	of	the	area	being	audited.	An	IS	auditor	may also	wish	to	consider	whether	documentary	evidence	would	be	useful	as evidence	(e.g.,	photograph	of	a	server	room	with	doors	fully	opened). · Reperformance -The	reperformance	process	is	a	key	audit	technique	that generally	provides	better	evidence	than	the	other	techniques	and	is,	therefore, used	when	a	combination	of	inquiry,	observation	and examination	of	evidence	does	not	provide	sufficient	assurance	that	a	control	is operating	effectively. · Walk-throughs -The	walk-through	is	an	audit	technique	to	confirm	the understanding	of	controls. While	these	evidence-gathering	techniques	are	part	of	an	audit,	an	audit	is	not considered	only	review	work.	It	includes	examination,	which	incorporates	the testing	of	controls	and	audit	evidence	and,	therefore,	includes	the	results	of	audit tests. An	IS	auditor	should	recognize	that	with	systems	development	techniques	such as	computer-aided	software	engineering	(CASE)	or	prototyping,	traditional systems	documentation	will	not	be	required	or	will	be	provided	as	an	automated form.	However,	an	IS	auditor	should	look	for	documentation	standards	and practices	within	the	IS	organization. An	IS	auditor	should	be	able	to	review	documentation	for	a	given	system	and determine	whether	it	follows	the	organization's	documentation	standards.	In addition,	an	IS	auditor	should	understand	the	current	approaches	to	developing systems	such	as	object	orientation,	CASE	tools	or	prototyping,	and	how	the documentation	is	constructed.	An	IS	auditor	should	recognize	other	components of	IS	documentation	such	as	database	specifications,	file	layouts	or	selfdocumented	program	listings.

## 1.8.1	INTERVIEWING	AND	OBSERVING	PERSONNEL	IN

## PERFORMANCE	OF	THEIR	DUTIES

Observing	personnel	in	the	performance	of	their	duties	assists	an	IS	auditor	in identifying: · Actual	functions -Observation	could	be	an	adequate	test	to	ensure	that	the individual	who	is	assigned	and	authorized	to	perform	a	particular	function	is	the person	who	is	actually	doing	the	job.	It	allows	an	IS	auditor	an	opportunity	to witness	how	policies	and	procedures	are	understood	and	practiced.	Depending on	the	specific	situation,	the	results	of	this	type	of	test	should	be	compared	with the	respective	logical	access	rights. · Actual	processes/procedures -Performing	a	walk-through	of	the process/procedure	allows	an	IS	auditor	to	obtain	evidence	of	compliance	and observe	deviations,	if	any.	This	type	of	observation	could	prove	to	be	useful	for physical	controls. · Security	awareness -Security	awareness	should	be	observed	to	verify	an individual's	understanding	and	practice	of	good	preventive	and	detective security	measures	to	safeguard	the	enterprise's	assets	and	data.	This	type	of information	could	be	supported	with	an	examination	of	previous	and	planned security	training. · Reporting	relationships -Reporting	relationships	should	be	observed	to ensure	that	assigned	responsibilities	and	adequate	SoD	are	being	practiced. Often,	the	results	of	this	type	of	test	should	be	compared	with	the	respective logical	access	rights. · Observation	drawbacks -The	observer	may	interfere	with	the	observed environment.	Personnel,	upon	noticing	that	they	are	being	observed,	may	change their	usual	behavior.	Interviewing	information	processing	personnel	and management	should	provide	adequate	assurance	that	the	staff	has	the	required technical	skills	to	perform	the	job.	This	is	an	important	factor	that	contributes	to an	effective	and	efficient	operation.

1.9	DATA	ANALYTICS

Data	analytics	is	an	important	tool	for	an	IS	auditor.	Through	the	use	of technology,	an	IS	auditor	can	select	and	analyze	full	data	sets	to	continuously audit	or	monitor	key	organizational	data	for	abnormalities	or	variances	that	can be	used	to	identify	and	evaluate	organizational	risk	and	compliance	with	control and	regulatory	requirements.	An	IS	auditor	can	use	data	analytics	for	the following	purposes:

- Determination	of	the	operational	effectiveness	of	the	current	control environment
- Determination	of	the	effectiveness	of	antifraud	procedures	and	controls
- Identification	of	business	process	errors
- Identification	of	business	process	improvements	and	inefficiencies	in	the control	environment
- Identification	of	exceptions	or	unusual	business	rules
- Identification	of	fraud
- Identification	of	areas	where	poor	data	quality	exists
- Performance	of	risk	assessment	at	the	planning	phase	of	an	audit	The	process used	to	collect	and	analyze	data	includes	the	following	elements:
- Setting	the	scope	(e.g.,	determining	audit/review	objectives;	defining	data needs,	sources	and	reliability)
- Identifying	and	obtaining	the	data	(e.g.,	requesting	data	from	responsible

sources,	testing	a	sample	of	data,	extracting	the	data	for	use)

- Validating	the	data	(e.g.,	determining	if	the	data	are	sufficient	and	reliable	to perform	audit	tests)	by:
- Validating	balances	independent	of	the	data	set	extracted
- Reconciling	detailed	data	to	report	control	totals
- Validating	numeric,	character	and	date	fields
- Verifying	the	time	period	of	the	data	set	(i.e.,	meets	scope	and	purpose)
- Verifying	that	all	necessary	fields	in	scoping	are	actually	included	in	the acquired	data	set ·	Executing	the	tests	(e.g.,	running	scripts	and	performing	other	analytical	tests) ·	Documenting	the	results	(e.g.,	recording	the	testing	purpose,	data	sources	and conclusions	reached) ·	Reviewing	the	results	(e.g.,	ensuring	that	the	testing	procedures	have	been adequately	performed	and	reviewed	by	a	qualified	person) ·	Retaining	the	results	(e.g.,	maintaining	important	test	elements),	such	as: -	Program	files -	Scripts -	Macros/automated	command	tests -	Data	files Data	analytics	can	be	effective	for	an	IS	auditor	in	both	the	planning	and fieldwork	phases	of	the	audit.	Data	analytics	can	be	used	to	accomplish	the following: ·	Combining	logical	access	files	with	human	resources	employee	master	files	for authorized	users ·	Combining	file	library	settings	with	data	from	the	change	management	systems and	dates	of	file	changes	that	can	be	matched	to	dates	of	authorized	events ·	Matching	ingress	with	egress	records	to	identify	tailgating	in	physical	security logs ·	Reviewing	table	or	system	configuration	settings ·	Reviewing	system	logs	for	unauthorized	access	or	unusual	activities ·	Testing	system	conversion ·	Testing	logical	access	SoD	(e.g.,	analyzing	Active	Directory	data	combined

with	job	descriptions)

- 1.9.1	COMPUTER-ASSISTED	AUDIT	TECHNIQUES

CAATs	are	important	tools	that	an	IS	auditor	uses	to	gather	and	analyze	data during	an	IS	audit	or	review.	When	systems	have	different	hardware	and software	environments,	data	structures,	record	formats	or	processing	functions,	it is	almost	impossible	for	an	IS	auditor	to	collect	certain	evidence	without	using such	a	software	tool. CAATs	also	enable	an	IS	auditor	to	gather	information	independently.	They provide	a	means	to	gain	access	and	analyze	data	for	a	predetermined	audit objective	and	to	report	the	audit	findings	with	emphasis	on	the	reliability	of	the records	produced	and	maintained	in	the	system.	The	reliability	of	the	source	of the	information	used	provides	reassurance	on	findings	generated. CAATs	include	many	types	of	tools	and	techniques	such	as	generalized	audit software	(GAS),	utility	software,	debugging	and	scanning	software,	test	data, application	software	tracing	and	mapping,	and	expert	systems. GAS	refers	to	standard	software	that	has	the	capability	to	directly	read	and access	data	from	various	database	platforms,	flat-file	systems	and	ASCII formats.	GAS	provides	an	IS	auditor	with	an	independent	means	to	gain	access to	data	for	analysis	and	the	ability	to	use	high-level,	problem-solving	software	to invoke	functions	to	be	performed	on	data	files.	Features	include	mathematical computations,	stratification,	statistical	analysis,	sequence	checking,	duplicate checking	and	recomputations.	The	following	functions	are	commonly	supported by	GAS: · File	access -Enables	the	reading	of	different	record	formats	and	file	structures · File	reorganization -Enables	indexing,	sorting,	merging	and	linking	with another	file · Data	selection -Enables	global	filtration	conditions	and	selection	criteria · Statistical	functions -Enables	sampling,	stratification	and	frequency	analysis · Arithmetical	function s-Enables	arithmetic	operators	and	functions	Utility software	is	a	subset	of	software-such	as	report	generators	of	the	database management	system-that	provides	evidence	about	system	control effectiveness.	Test	data	involve	an	IS	auditor	using	a	sample	set	of	data	to	assess whether	logic	errors	exist	in	a	program	and	whether	the	program	meets	its objectives.	The	review	of	an	application	system	will	provide	information	about internal	controls	built	in	the	system.	The	audit-expert	system	will	give	direction and	valuable	information	to	all	levels	of	auditors	while	carrying	out	the	audit because	the	query-based	system	is	built	on	the	knowledge	base	of	senior	auditors or	managers. These	tools	and	techniques	can	be	used	in	performing	various	audit	procedures such	as: ·	Tests	of	the	details	of	transactions	and	balances ·	Analytical	review	procedures ·	Compliance	tests	of	IS	general	controls ·	Compliance	tests	of	IS	application	controls ·	Network	and	OS	vulnerability	assessments ·	Penetration	testing ·	Application	security	testing	and	source	code	security	scans An	IS	auditor	should	have	a	thorough	understanding	of	CAATs	and	know	where and	when	to	apply	them.	For	example,	an	IS	auditor	should	review	the	results	of engagement	procedures	to	determine	whether	there	are	indications	that irregularities	or	illegal	acts	may	have	occurred.	Using	CAATs	could	aid significantly	in	the	effective	and	efficient	detection	of	irregularities	or	illegal acts. An	IS	auditor	should	weigh	the	costs	and	benefits	of	using	CAATs	before	going through	the	effort,	time	and	expense	of	purchasing	or	developing	them. Issues	to	consider	include: ·	Ease	of	use	for	existing	and	future	audit	staff

·	Training	requirements ·	Complexity	of	coding	and	maintenance ·	Flexibility	of	uses ·	Installation	requirements ·	Processing	efficiencies ·	Effort	required	to	bring	the	source	data	into	the	CAATs	for	analysis ·	Ensuring	the	integrity	of	imported	data	by	safeguarding	their	authenticity ·	Recording	the	time	stamp	of	data	downloaded	at	critical	processing	points	to sustain	the	credibility	of	the	review ·	Obtaining	permission	to	install	the	software	on	the	auditee	servers ·	Reliability	of	the	software ·	Confidentiality	of	the	data	being	processed When	developing	CAATs,	the	following	are	examples	of	documentation	to	be retained: ·	Online	reports	detailing	high-risk	issues	for	review ·	Commented	program	listings ·	Flowcharts ·	Sample	reports ·	Record	and	file	layouts ·	Field	definitions ·	Operating	instructions

- Description	of	applicable	source	documents

CAATs	documentation	should	be	referenced	to	the	audit	program	and	clearly identify	the	audit	procedures	and	objectives	being	served.	When	requesting access	to	production	data	for	use	with	CAATs,	an	IS	auditor	should	request	readonly	access.	Any	data	manipulation	by	an	IS	auditor	should	be	applied	to	copies of	production	files	in	a	controlled	environment	to	ensure	that	production	data	are not	exposed	to	unauthorized	updating.	Most	CAATs	allow	for	production	data	to be	downloaded	from	production	systems	to	a	stand-alone	platform	and	then analyzed	from	the	standalone	platform,	thereby	insulating	the	production systems	from	any	adverse	impact.

## CAATs	as	a	Continuous	Online	Audit	Approach

An	important	advantage	of	CAATs	is	the	ability	to	improve	audit	efficiency through	continuous	online	auditing	techniques.	To	this	end,	an	IS	auditor	must develop	audit	techniques	that	are	appropriate	for	use	with	advanced	information systems.	In	addition,	they	must	be	involved	in	the	creation	of	advanced	systems at	the	early	stages	of	development	and	implementation	and	must	make	greater use	of	automated	tools	that	are	suitable	for	their	organization's	automated environment.	This	takes	the	form	of	the	continuous	audit	approach.

- 1.9.2	CONTINUOUS	AUDITING	AND	MONITORING

Continuous	auditing	is	an	approach	used	by	IS	auditors	to	monitor	system reliability	on	a	continuous	basis	and	gather	selective	audit	evidence	through	the computer.	A	distinctive	characteristic	of	continuous	auditing	is	the	short	time lapse	between	the	facts	to	be	audited,	the	collection	of	evidence	and	audit reporting.	To	properly	understand	the	implications	and	requirements	of continuous	auditing,	a	distinction	is	made	between	continuous	auditing	and continuous	monitoring: · Continuous	auditing -Enables	an	IS	auditor	to	perform	tests	and	assessments in	a	real-time	or	near-real-time	environment.	Continuous	auditing	is	designed	to enable	an	IS	auditor	to	report	results	on	the	subject	matter	being	audited	within	a much	shorter	time	frame	than	under	a	traditional	audit	approach. · Continuous	monitoring -Used	by	an	organization	to	observe	the	performance of	one	or	many	processes,	systems	or	types	of	data.	For	example,	real-time antivirus	or	IDSs	may	operate	in	a	continuous	monitoring	fashion. Continuous	auditing	should	be	independent	of	continuous	control	or	monitoring activities.	When	both	continuous	monitoring	and	auditing	take	place,	continuous assurance	can	be	established.	In	practice,	continuous	auditing	is	the	precursor	to management	adopting	continuous	monitoring	as	a	process	on	a	day-to-day	basis. Often,	the	audit	function	will	hand	over	the	techniques	used	in	continuous auditing	to	the	business,	which	will	then	run	the	continuous	monitoring.	This collaboration	has	led	to	increased	appreciation	among	process	owners	of	the value	that	the	audit	function	brings	to	the	organization,	leading	to	greater confidence	and	trust	between	the	business	and	the	audit	function.	Nevertheless, the	lack	of	independence	and	objectivity	inherent	in	continuous	monitoring should	not	be	overlooked,	and	continuous	monitoring	should	never	be considered	as	a	substitute	for	the	audit	function. Continuous	auditing	efforts	often	incorporate	new	IT	developments;	increased processing	capabilities	of	current	hardware,	software,	standards	and	AI	tools; and	attempts	to	collect	and	analyze	data	at	the	moment	of	the	transaction.	Data must	be	gathered	from	different	applications	working	within different	environments,	transactions	must	be	screened,	the	transaction environment	has	to	be	analyzed	to	detect	trends	and	exceptions,	and	atypical patterns	(i.e.,	a	transaction	with	significantly	higher	or	lower	value	than	typical for	a	given	business	partner)	must	be	exposed.	If	all	this	must	happen	in	real time,	perhaps	even	before	final	sign-off	of	a	transaction,	it	is	mandatory	to	adopt and	combine	various	top-level	IT	techniques.	The	IT environment	is	a	natural	enabler	for	the	application	of	continuous	auditing because	of	the	intrinsic	automated	nature	of	its	underlying	processes. Continuous	auditing	aims	to	provide	a	more	secure	platform	to	avoid	fraud	and	a real-time	process	aimed	at	ensuring	a	high	level	of	financial	control. Continuous	auditing	and	monitoring	tools	are	often	built	into	many	enterprise resource	planning	packages	and	most	OS	and	network	security	packages. These	environments,	if	appropriately	configured	and	populated	with	rules, parameters	and	formulas,	can	output	exception	lists	on	request	while	operating against	actual	data.	Therefore,	they	represent	an	instance	of	continuous	auditing. The	difficulty,	but	significant	added	value,	of	using	these	features	is	that	they postulate	a	definition	of	what	would	be	a 'dangerous'	or	exception	condition.	For	example,	whether	a	set	of	granted	IS

access	permissions	is	to	be	deemed	risk-free	will	depend	on	having	well-defined SoD.	On	the	other	hand,	it	may	be	much	harder	to	decide	if	a	given	sequence	of steps	taken	to	modify	and	maintain	a	database	record	points	to	a	potential	risk.

It	is	important	to	validate	the	source	of	the	data	used	for	continuous	auditing	and note	the	possibility	of	manual	changes.

- 1.9.3	CONTINUOUS	AUDITING	TECHNIQUES

Continuous	audit	techniques	are	important	IS	audit	tools,	particularly	when	they are	used	in	time-sharing	environments	that	process	a	large	number	of transactions	but	leave	a	scarce	paper	trail.	By	permitting	an	IS	auditor	to evaluate	operating	controls	on	a	continuous	basis	without	disrupting	the organization's	usual	operations,	continuous	audit	techniques	improve	the from	an	inoperative	account,	a	continuous	audit	technique	will	report	this

security	of	a	system.	When	a	system	is	misused	by	someone	withdrawing	money withdrawal	in	a	timely	fashion	to	an	IS	auditor.	Thus,	the	time	lag between	the	misuse	of	the	system	and	the	detection	of	that	misuse	is	reduced. The	realization	that	failures,	improper	manipulation	and	lack	of	controls	will	be detected	on	a	timely	basis	by	the	use	of	continuous	audit	procedures	gives	an	IS auditor	and	management	greater	confidence	in	a	system's	reliability.

There	are	five	types	of	automated	evaluation	techniques	applicable	to	continuous auditing: 1. Systems	control	audit	review	file	and	embedded	audit	modules (SCARF/EAM) -The	use	of	this	technique	involves	embedding	specially written	audit	software	in	the	organization's	host	application	system	so	the application	systems	are	monitored	on	a	selective	basis. 2. Snapshots -This	technique	involves	taking	what	might	be	termed

'pictures'	of	the	processing	path	that	a	transaction	follows,	from	the	input	to	the output	stage.	With	the	use	of	this	technique,	transactions	are	tagged	by	applying identifiers	to	input	data	and	recording	selected	information	about	what	occurs	for

an	IS	auditor's	subsequent	review.

3. Audit	hooks -This	technique	involves	embedding	hooks	in	application

systems	to	function	as	red	flags	and	induce	IS	security	and	auditors	to	act	before an	error	or	irregularity	gets	out	of	hand. 4. Integrated	test	facility	(ITF) -In	this	technique,	dummy	entities	are	set	up and	included	in	an	auditee's	production	files.	An	IS	auditor	can	make	the	system either	process	live	transactions	or	test	transactions	during	regular	processing	runs and	have	these	transactions	update	the	records	of	the	dummy	entity.	The	operator enters	the	test	transactions	simultaneously	with	the	live	transactions	that	are entered	for	processing.	An	auditor	then	compares	the	output	with	the	data	that have	been	independently	calculated	to	verify	the	correctness	of	the	computerprocessed	data. 5. Continuous	and	intermittent	simulation	(CIS) -During	a	process	run	of	a transaction,	the	computer	system	simulates	the	instruction	execution	of	the application.	As	each	transaction	is	entered,	the	simulator	decides	whether	the transaction	meets	certain	predetermined	criteria	and,	if	so,	audits	the	transaction. If	not,	the	simulator	waits	until	it	encounters	the	next	transaction	that	meets	the criteria. In figure	1.13, the	relative	advantages	and	disadvantages	of	the	various continuous	audit	tools	are	presented.

<!-- image -->

The	use	of	each	of	the	continuous	audit	techniques	has	advantages	and disadvantages.	Their	selection	and	implementation	depends,	to	a	large	extent,	on the	complexity	of	an	organization's	computer	systems	and	applications,	and	an IS	auditor's	ability	to	understand	and	evaluate	the	system	with	and	without	the use	of	continuous	audit	techniques.	In	addition,	an	IS	auditor	must	recognize	that continuous	audit	techniques	are	not	a	cure	for	all	control	problems	and	the	use	of these	techniques	provides	only	limited	assurance	that	the	information	processing systems	examined	are	operating	as	they	were	intended	to	function. Techniques	that	are	used	to	operate	in	a	continuous	auditing	environment	must work	at	all	data	levels-single	input,	transaction	and	databases-and	include:

·	Transaction	logging ·	Query	tools ·	Statistics	and	data	analysis ·	DBMS ·	Data	warehouses,	data	marts,	data	mining ·	Intelligent	agents ·	EAM ·	Neural	network	technology ·	Standards	such	as	Extensible	Business	Reporting	Language	(XBRL)	Intelligent software	agents	may	be	used	to	automate	the	evaluation	processes	and	allow	for flexibility	and	dynamic	analysis	capabilities.	The	configuration	and	application of	intelligent	agents	(sometimes	referred	to	as	bots)	allow	for	continuous monitoring	of	systems	settings	and	the	delivery	of	alert	messages	when	certain thresholds	are	exceeded	or	certain	conditions	are	met. Full	continuous	auditing	processes	have	to	be	carefully	built	into	applications and	work	in	layers.	The	auditing	tools	must	operate	in	parallel	to	normal processing-capturing	real-time	data,	extracting	standardized	profiles	or descriptors,	and	passing	the	result	to	the	auditing	layers. Continuous	auditing	has	an	intrinsic	edge	over	point-in-time	or	periodic	auditing because	it	captures	internal	control	problems	as	they	occur,	preventing	negative effects.	Implementation	can	also	reduce	possible	or	intrinsic	audit	inefficiencies such	as	delays,	planning	time,	inefficiencies	of	the	audit	process,	overhead	due to	work	segmentation,	multiple	quality	or	supervisory	reviews,	or	discussions concerning	the	validity	of	findings. Full	top	management	support,	dedication,	and	extensive	experience	and technical	knowledge	are	all	necessary	to	accomplish	continuous	auditing,	while minimizing	the	impact	on	the	underlying	audited	business	processes.

The	auditing	layers	and	settings	may	also	need	continual	adjustment	and updating. Besides	difficulty	and	cost,	continuous	auditing	has	an	inherent	disadvantage	in that	internal	control	experts	and	auditors	might	be	resistant	to	trust	an	automated tool	in	lieu	of	their	personal	judgment	and	evaluation.	Also,	mechanisms	have	to be	put	in	place	to	eliminate	false	negatives	and	false	positives	in	the	reports generated	by	such	audits	so	that	the	report	generated	continues	to	inspire

stakeholders'	confidence	in	its	accuracy.

1.10	REPORTING	AND	COMMUNICATION	TECHNIQUES

Effective	and	clear	communication	can	significantly	improve	the	quality	of audits	and	maximize	their	results.	Audit	findings	should	be	reported	and communicated	to	stakeholders,	with	appropriate	buy-in	from	the	auditees,	for	the audit	process	to	be	successful.	An	IS	auditor	should	also	consider	the motivations	and	perspectives	of	the	recipients	of	the	audit	report	so	their concerns	may	be	properly	addressed.	Communication	skills	(both	written	and verbal)	determine	the	effectiveness	of	the	audit	reporting	process. Communication	and	negotiation	skills	are	required	throughout	the	audit. Successful	resolution	of	audit	findings	with	auditees	is	essential	so	that	auditees will	adopt	the	recommendations	in	the	report	and	initiate	prompt	corrective action.	To	achieve	this	goal,	an	IS	auditor	should	be	skilled	in	the use	of	techniques	such	as	facilitation,	negotiation	and	conflict	resolution.	An	IS auditor	should	also	understand	the	concept	of	materiality	(i.e.,	the	relative importance	of	audit	findings	based	on	business	impact)	when	reporting	on	audit results.

- 1.10.1	COMMUNICATING	AUDIT	RESULTS

The	exit	interview,	conducted	at	the	end	of	the	audit,	provides	an	IS	auditor	with

the	opportunity	to	discuss	findings	and	recommendations	with	the	auditee management.	During	the	exit	interview,	an	IS	auditor	should: ·	Ensure	that	the	facts	presented	in	the	report	are	correct	and	material. ·	Ensure	that	the	recommendations	are	realistic	and	cost-effective	and,	if	not, seek	alternatives	through	negotiation	with	auditee	management. ·	Recommend	implementation	dates	for	agreed-on	recommendations. IS	auditors	should	be	aware	that,	ultimately,	they	are	responsible	to	senior management	and	the	audit	committee	and	they	should	feel	free	to communicate	issues	or	concerns	to	these	groups.	An	attempt	to	deny	access	by levels	lower	than	senior	management	would	limit	the	independence	of	the	audit function. Before	communicating	the	results	of	an	audit	to	senior	management,	an	IS auditor	should	discuss	the	findings	with	the	auditee	management	to	gain agreement	on	the	findings	and	develop	an	agreed-upon	course	of	corrective action.	In	cases	where	there	is	disagreement,	an	IS	auditor	should	elaborate	on the	significance	of	the	findings,	risk	and	effects	of	not	correcting	the	control weakness.	Sometimes	the	auditee	management	may	request	assistance	from	an IS	auditor	in	implementing	the	recommended	control	enhancements. An	IS	auditor	should	communicate	the	difference	between	an	IS	auditor's	role and	that	of	a	consultant	and	consider	how	assisting	the	auditee	may	adversely affect	an	IS	auditor's	independence. After	agreement	has	been	reached	with	auditee	management,	IS	audit management	should	brief	senior	auditee	management.	A	summary	of	audit activities	should	be	presented	periodically	to	the	audit	committee.	Audit committees	typically	are	composed	of	individuals	who	do	not	work	directly	for the	organization	and,	thus,	provide	an	IS	audit	and	assurance	professional with	an	independent	route	to	report	sensitive	findings.

## 1.10.2	AUDIT	REPORT	OBJECTIVES

The	six	objectives	of	audit	reporting	are: ·	Formally	present	the	audit	results	to	the	auditee	(and	the	audit	client,	if different	from	the	auditee). ·	Serve	as	formal	closure	of	the	audit	engagement.

- Provide	statements	of	assurance	and,	if	needed,	identification	of	areas	requiring

corrective	action	and	related	recommendations. ·	Serve	as	a	valued	reference	for	any	party	researching	the	auditee	or	audit	topic. ·	Serve	as	the	basis	for	a	follow-up	audit	if	audit	findings	were	presented. ·	Promote	audit	credibility.	This	depends	on	the	report	being	well	developed	and well	written. The	IS	audit-specific	reporting	objectives	are	developed	based	on	report requirements	from	auditee	management	and	other	users	of	the	report	and	in compliance	with	IS	audit	and	assurance	standards	and	audit	organization protocols.	The	auditee	or	other	stakeholders,	such	as	oversight	organizations,	are identified	during	audit	planning.	An	IS	auditor	develops	the	audit	scope	and objectives	by	considering	these	requirements	and	other	elements	of	audit planning,	such	as	the	assessments	of	risk,	materiality,	and	appropriateness	of stated	controls	together	with	regulatory	and	IT	governance	requirements.	The audit	report	formally	presents	the	purpose	and	the	results	of	the	audit	in	line	with these	requirements.	Every	audit	report	should	provide	unbiased,	well-supported responses	to	the	audit's	objectives.	For	example,	if	the	audit	objective	is	to determine	whether	adequate	controls	are	in	effect	to	provide	reasonable assurance	that	only	authorized	physical	access	can	be	gained	to	the	data	center, then	the	report	should	state	an	IS	auditor's	conclusion	or	opinion	as	to	the adequacy	of	the	controls	to	achieve	that	objective.	If	controls	need	to	be implemented	or	strengthened	to	achieve	the	objective,	then	the	report	should

provide	a	recommendation	to	meet	that	need.

- 1.10.3	AUDIT	REPORT	STRUCTURE	AND	CONTENTS

Audit	reports	are	the	end	product	of	the	IS	audit	work.	The	exact	format	of	an audit	report	will	vary	by	organization;	however,	an	IS	auditor	should	understand the	basic	components	of	an	audit	report	and	how	it	communicates	audit	findings to	management. Note: The	CISA	candidate	should	become	familiar	with	the	ISACA	IS Audit	and	Assurance	Standards	1401	Reporting	and	1402	Follow-up Activities. Audit	reports	usually	have	the	following	structure	and	content: ·	An	introduction	to	the	report,	including	a	statement	of	audit	objectives, limitations	to	the	audit	and	scope,	the	period	of	audit	coverage,	and	a	general statement	on	the	nature	and	extent	of	audit	procedures	conducted	and	processes examined	during	the	audit,	followed	by	a	statement	on	the	IS audit	methodology	and	guidelines ·	Audit	findings	included	in	separate	sections	and	often	grouped	in	sections	by materiality	and/or	intended	recipient ·	An	IS	auditor's	overall	conclusion	and	opinion	on	the	adequacy	of	controls	and procedures	examined	during	the	audit,	and	the	actual	potential	risk	identified	as a	consequence	of	detected	deficiencies ·	An	IS	auditor's	reservations	or	qualifications	with	respect	to	the	audit -	This	may	state	that	the	controls	or	procedures	examined	were	found	to	be adequate	or	inadequate.	The	balance	of	the	audit	report	should	support	that conclusion,	and	the	overall	evidence	gathered	during	the	audit	should	provide	an even	greater	level	of	support	for	the	audit	conclusions. ·	Detailed	audit	findings	and	recommendations -	An	IS	auditor	decides	whether	to	include	specific	findings	in	an	audit	report. This	should	be	based	on	the	materiality	of	the	findings	and	the	intended	recipient of	the	audit	report.	An	audit	report	directed	to	the	audit	committee	of	the	board of	directors,	for	example,	may	not	include	findings	that	are	important	only	to local	management	but	have	little	control	significance	to	the	overall	organization. The	decision	on	what	to	include	in	various	levels	of	audit	reports	depends	on	the guidance	provided	by	upper	management. ·	A	variety	of	findings,	some	of	which	may	be	quite	material	while	others	are minor	in	nature -	An	IS	auditor	may	choose	to	present	minor	findings	to	management	in	an alternate	format,	such	as	by	memorandum. An	IS	auditor	should	make	the	final	decision	about	what	to	include	or	exclude from	the	audit	report.	Generally,	an	IS	auditor	should	be	concerned	with providing	a	balanced	report,	describing	not	only	negative	issues	in	terms	of findings	but	positive	constructive	comments	regarding	improved	processes	and controls	or	effective	controls	already	in	place.	Overall,	an	IS	auditor	should exercise	independence	in	the	reporting	process. Auditee	management	evaluates	the	findings,	stating	corrective	actions	to	be taken	and	timing	for	implementing	these	anticipated	corrective	actions. Management	may	not	be	able	to	implement	all	audit	recommendations immediately.	For	example,	an	IS	auditor	may	recommend	changes	to	an information	system	that	is	also	undergoing	other	changes	or	enhancements. An	IS	auditor	should	not	necessarily	expect	that	the	other	changes	will	be suspended	until	their	recommendations	are	implemented.	Rather,	all	may	be implemented	at	once. An	IS	auditor	should	discuss	the	recommendations	and	any	planned implementation	dates	while	in	the	process	of	releasing	the	audit	report. Various	constraints-such	as	staff	limitations,	budgets	or	other	projectsmay	limit	immediate	implementation.	Management	should	develop	a	firm program	for	corrective	actions.	It	is	important	to	obtain	a	commitment	from auditee	management	on	the	date	by	which	the	action	plan	will	be implemented	(the	solution	can	take	a	long	time	for	implementation)	and	the manner	in	which	it	will	be	performed	because	the	corrective	action	may	bring risk	that	may	be	avoided	if	identified	while	discussing	and	finalizing	the	audit report.	If	appropriate,	an	IS	auditor	may	want	to	report	to	senior	management	on the	progress	of	implementing	recommendations. The	report	should	include	all	significant	audit	findings.	When	a	finding	requires explanation,	an	IS	auditor	should	describe	the	finding,	its	cause	and	risk.	When appropriate,	an	IS	auditor	should	provide	the	explanation	in	a	separate	document and	refer	to	it	in	the	report.	For	example,	this	approach may	be	appropriate	for	highly	confidential	matters.	An	IS	auditor	should	also identify	the	organizational,	professional	and	governmental	criteria	applied. The	report	should	be	issued	in	a	timely	manner	to	encourage	prompt	corrective action.	When	appropriate,	an	IS	auditor	should	promptly	communicate significant	findings	to	the	appropriate	persons	prior	to	the	issuance	of	the	report. Prior	communication	of	significant	findings	should	not	alter	the	intent	or	content of	the	report.

## 1.10.4	AUDIT	DOCUMENTATION

Audit	documentation	is	the	written	record	that	provides	the	support	for	the representations	in	the	auditor's	report.	It	should: 1.	Demonstrate	that	the	engagement	complied	with	the	standards. 2.	Support	the	basis	for	the	auditor's	conclusions. Audit	documentation	should	include,	at	a	minimum,	a	record	of	the	following: ·	Planning	and	preparation	of	the	audit	scope	and	objectives ·	Description	and/or	walk-throughs	on	the	scoped	audit	area ·	Audit	program ·	Audit	steps	performed	and	audit	evidence	gathered ·	Use	of	services	of	other	auditors	and	experts ·	Audit	findings,	conclusions	and	recommendations ·	Audit	documentation	relation	with	document	identification	and	dates	It	is	also recommended	that	documentation	include	these	items: ·	A	copy	of	the	report	issued	as	a	result	of	the	audit	work ·	Evidence	of	audit	supervisory	review Documents	should	include	audit	information	that	is	required	by	laws	and regulations,	contractual	stipulations,	and	professional	standards.	Audit documentation	is	the	necessary	evidence	supporting	the	conclusions	reached	and should	be	clear,	complete,	easily	retrievable	and	sufficiently	comprehensible. Audit	documentation	is	generally	the	property	of	the	auditee	and	should	be accessible	only	to	authorized	personnel	under	specific	or	general	permission. When	access	to	audit	documentation	is	requested	by	external	parties,	an	IS	audit and	assurance	professional	should	obtain appropriate	prior	approval	of	senior	management	and	legal	counsel	before providing	it	to	those	external	parties. Policies	should	be	developed	regarding	custody,	retention	requirements	and release	of	audit	documentation.	The	documentation	format	and	media	are optional,	but	due	diligence	and	good	practices	require	that	work	papers	be	dated, initialed,	page-numbered,	relevant,	complete,	clear,	self-contained	and	properly labeled,	filed,	and	kept	in	custody.	Work	papers	may	be	automated. An	IS	auditor	should	consider	how	to	maintain	integrity	and	protection	of	audit test	evidence	to	preserve	its	proof	value	in	support	of	audit	results. An	IS	auditor	should	be	able	to	prepare	adequate	work	papers,	narratives, questionnaires	and	understandable	system	flowcharts.	Audit	documentation	or work	papers	can	be	considered	the	bridge	or	interface	between	the	audit objectives	and	the	final	report.	They	should	provide	a	seamless	transitionwith	traceability	and	accountability-from	objectives	to	report	and	from	report to	objectives.	The	audit	report,	in	this	context,	can	be	viewed	as	a	set	of particular	work	papers. The	quest	for	integrating	work	papers	in	the	auditor's	eenvironment	has	resulted in	all	major	audit	and	project	management	packages,	CAATs,	and	expert	systems offering	a	complete	array	of	automated	documentation	and	import-export features. Audit	documentation	should	support	the	findings	and	conclusions/opinions. Time	of	evidence	can	be	crucial	to	supporting	audit	findings	and	conclusions. An	IS	auditor	should	take	care	to	ensure	that	the	evidence	gathered	and documented	will	be	able	to	support	audit	findings	and	conclusions.

The	concept	of	materiality	is	a	key	issue	when	deciding	which	findings	to	bring forward	in	an	audit	report.	Key	to	determining	the	materiality	of	audit	findings	is the	assessment	of	what	would	be	significant	to	different	levels	of	management. Assessment	requires	judging	the	potential	effect	of	the	finding	if	corrective action	is	not	taken.	The	following	are	examples: ·	A	weakness	in	information	security	physical	access	controls	at	a	remote distributed	computer	site	may	be	significant	to	management	at	the	site	but will	not	necessarily	be	material	to	upper	management	at	headquarters. However,	there	may	be	other	matters	at	the	remote	site	that	would	be	material	to upper	management. ·	A	review	of	access	deprovisioning	discovers	that	a	terminated	user's	access was	not	removed	after	the	user's	termination	date,	but	it	was	caught	during management's	review	of	security	access,	at	which	time	the	terminated	user's access	was	removed.	This	type	of	discovery	would	not	likely	be	brought	to	the attention	of	upper	management	but	would	be	documented	and	discussed	with

- auditee	management.
- 1.10.5	FOLLOW-UP	ACTIVITIES

Auditing	is	an	ongoing	process.	An	IS	auditor	is	not	effective	if	audits	are performed	and	reports	issued,	but	no	follow-up	is	conducted	to	determine whether	management	has	taken	appropriate	corrective	actions.	IS	auditors	should have	a	follow-up	program	to	determine	if	agreed-on	corrective	actions	have	been implemented.	Although	IS	auditors	who	work	for	external	audit	firms	may	not necessarily	follow	this	process,	they	may	achieve	these	tasks	if	agreed	to	by	the auditee. The	timing	of	the	follow-up	will	depend	on	the	criticality	of	the	findings	and	is subject	to	an	IS	auditor's	judgment.	The	results	of	the	follow-up	should	be communicated	to	appropriate	levels	of	management.	The	level	of	an	IS auditor's	follow-up	review	will	depend	on	several	factors.	In	some	instances,	an IS	auditor	may	merely	need	to	inquire	as	to	the	current	status.	In	other	instances, an	IS	auditor	who	works	in	an	internal	audit	function	may	have	to	perform certain	audit	steps	to	determine	whether	the	corrective	actions	agreed	on	by management	have	been	implemented.

## 1.10.6	TYPES	OF	IS	AUDIT	REPORTS

The	IS	audit	report	is	driven	mainly	by	the	type	of	audit	engagement	and	the reporting	requirements	from	IS	audit	and	assurance	standards.	While	most	IS audits	result	in	a	single	IS	audit	report,	in	some	situations,	more	than	one	report can	be	applicable.	For	example,	in	addition	to	a	report	for	a	general	audience,	a separate	confidential	security	report	containing	detailed	technical	information may	need	to	be	created	to	ensure	that	security	risk	is	not	made available	to	unintended	parties. The	organization	and	specific	content	of	the	report	also	depend	on	the	scope	and objectives	of	the	audit	engagement	and	the	degree	to	which	IT	processes	and systems	are	examined	or	require	explanation.	The	format	and	protocols	for	audit report	presentation	can	also	depend	on	any	requirements	and	expectations	set forth	between	the	audit	organization	and	the	auditee. Requirements	for	audit	report	contents	or	format	may	be	requested	by	the	audit client	who	may	or	may	not	be	from	the	organization	as	the	auditee. Although	review,	examination	and	agreed-upon	procedure	engagements	have similar	reporting	requirements,	each	type	of	engagement	stipulates	different reporting	requirements	and	limitations.	The	primary	distinctions	among	reviews, examinations	and	agreed-upon	procedures	engagements	are	the	audit	objectives, the	nature	and	extent	of	audit	work,	and	the	level	of	assurance	to	be	provided. While	all	three	types	of	audits	include	review	work,	performing	audit	tests	is	far more	prevalent	in	audits	or	examinations	that	require	stronger	evidence	upon which	to	base	an	opinion.	Agreed-upon	procedures	may	also	include	testing,	but because	of	other	limitations,	an	audit	opinion	is	not	expressed.	Although	audit scope	may	be	the	same	for	reviews	and	examinations,	scope	is	likely	to	be	more narrowly	defined	for	agreed-upon	procedure	audits.

## 1.11	QUALITY	ASSURANCE	AND	IMPROVEMENT	OF THE	AUDIT	PROCESS

An	IS	auditor	plays	an	important	role	in	improving	the	quality	and	control	of information	systems	in	an	organization.	Elements	of	quality	control	with	respect to	an	audit	engagement	include	the	following:

·	Leadership	responsibilities	for	quality	in	audits ·	Ethical	requirements	(including	independence) ·	Acceptance	and	continuance	of	client	relationships	and	specific	audit engagements ·	Assignment	of	engagement	teams ·	Engagement	performance	(including	consultation,	resolution	of	differences	of opinion	and	engagement	quality	control	review) ·	Monitoring Quality	assurance	is	often	achieved	by	the	IS	auditor	serving	as	a	consultant, advising	and	facilitating	business	areas	to	participate	in	process	improvement and	control.	One	such	approach	is	through	the	process	of	control	self-assessment (CSA).

## 1.11.1	CONTROL	SELF-ASSESSMENT

CSA	is	an	assessment	of	controls	made	by	the	staff	and	management	of	the	unit or	units	involved.	It	is	a	management	technique	that	assures	stakeholders, customers	and	other	parties	that	the	internal	control	system	of	the	organization	is reliable.	It	also	ensures	that	employees	are	aware	of	the	risk	to	the	business	and they	conduct	periodic,	proactive	reviews	of	controls.	It	is	a	methodology	used	to review	key	business	objectives;	risk	involved	in	achieving	the	business objectives;	and	internal	controls	designed	to	manage	business	risk	in	a	formal, documented	and	collaborative	process. An	IS	auditor	acts	in	the	role	of	facilitator	to	the	business	process	owners	to	help them	define	and	assess	appropriate	controls	and	helps	the	process	owners understand	the	need	for	controls,	based	on	risk	to	the	business	processes.	The process	owners	and	the	personnel	who	run	the	processes	use	their	knowledge and	understanding	of	the	business	function	to	evaluate	the	performance	of controls	against	the	established	control	objectives,	while	considering	the	risk appetite	of	the	organization.	Process	owners	are	in	an	ideal	position	to	define	the appropriate	controls	because	they	have	a	greater	knowledge	of	the	process objectives.

A	CSA	program	can	be	implemented	by	various	methods.	For	small	business units	within	organizations,	it	can	be	implemented	by	facilitated	workshops	in which	functional	management	and	IS	auditors	come	together	and	deliberate	how best	to	evolve	a	control	structure	for	the	business	unit.	In	a	workshop,	the	role	of a	facilitator	is	to	support	the	decision-making	process.	The	facilitator	creates	a supportive	environment	to	help	participants	explore	their	own	experiences	and those	of	others;	identify	control	strengths	and	weaknesses;	and	share	their knowledge,	ideas	and	concerns.	If	appropriate,	a	facilitator	may	also	offer	his/her own	expertise	in	addition	to	facilitating	the exchange	of	ideas	and	experience.

## Objectives	of	CSA

The	primary	objective	of	a	CSA	program	is	to	leverage	the	internal	audit function	by	shifting	some	of	the	control	monitoring	responsibilities	to	the functional	areas.	It	is	not	intended	to	replace	audit's	responsibilities	but	to enhance	them.	Auditees	such	as	line	managers	are	responsible	for	controls	in their	environment;	the	managers	should	also	be	responsible	for	monitoring	the controls.	CSA	programs	must	also	educate	management	about	control	design	and monitoring,	particularly	concentrating	on	areas	of	high	risk. When	employing	a	CSA	program,	measures	of	success	for	each	phase	(planning, implementation	and	monitoring)	should	be	developed	to	determine	the	value derived	from	CSA	and	its	future	use.	One	critical	success	factor	(CSF)	is	to conduct	a	meeting	with	the	business	unit	representatives	(including	appropriate and	relevant	staff	and	management)	to	identify	the	business	unit's	primary objective-to	determine	the	reliability	of	the	internal	control	system.	In	addition, actions	that	increase	the	likelihood	of	achieving	the	primary	objective	should	be identified.

## Benefits	of	CSA

Some	of	the	benefits	of	CSA	include	the	following: ·	Early	detection	of	risk ·	More	effective	and	improved	internal	controls ·	Creation	of	cohesive	teams	through	employee	involvement

·	Development	of	a	sense	of	ownership	of	the	controls	in	the	employees	and process	owners	and	reduction	of	their	resistance	to	control	improvement initiatives ·	Increased	employee	awareness	of	organizational	objectives,	and	knowledge	of risk	and	internal	controls ·	Increased	communication	between	operational	and	top	management ·	Highly	motivated	employees ·	Improved	audit	rating	process ·	Reduction	in	control	cost ·	Assurance	provided	to	stakeholders	and	customers ·	Necessary	assurance	given	to	top	management	about	the	adequacy	of internal	controls	as	required	by	the	various	regulatory	agencies	and	laws Disadvantages	of	CSA CSA	contains	some	disadvantages,	including: ·	It	could	be	mistaken	as	an	audit	function	replacement. ·	It	may	be	regarded	as	an	additional	workload	(e.g.,	one	more	report	to	be submitted	to	management). ·	Failure	to	act	on	improvement	suggestions	could	damage	employee	morale. ·	Lack	of	motivation	may	limit	effectiveness	in	the	detection	of	weak	controls.

## The	IS	Auditor's	Role	in	CSA

When	CSA	programs	are	established,	auditors	become	internal	control professionals	and	assessment	facilitators.	Their	value	in	this	role	is	evident	when management	takes	responsibility	and	ownership	for	internal	control	systems under	their	authority	through	process	improvements	in	their	control	structures, including	an	active	monitoring	component.

To	be	effective	in	this	facilitative	and	innovative	role,	the	IS	auditor	must understand	the	business	process	being	assessed.	It	is	important	to	remember	that IS	auditors	are	the	facilitators	and	the	management	client	is	the	participant	in	the CSA	process.	For	example,	during	a	CSA	workshop,	instead	of	performing detailed	audit	procedures,	the	IS	auditor	will	lead	and	guide	the	auditees	in assessing	their	environment	by	providing	insight	about	the	objectives	of	controls based	on	risk	assessment.	The	managers,	with	a	focus	on	improving	the productivity	of	the	process,	might	suggest	replacement	of	preventive	controls.	In this	case,	the	IS	auditor	is	better	positioned	to	explain	the	risk	associated	with such	changes. To	provide	higher-quality	audits	and	make	use	of	internal	and/or	external	audit or	subject	matter	expertise,	an	integrated	audit	approach	is	used	to	perform	riskbased	assessments	of	internal	controls	over	an	operation,	process	or	entity.

- 1.11.2	INTEGRATED	AUDITING

The	dependence	of	business	processes	on	IT	has	necessitated	that	all	auditors develop	an	understanding	of	IT	control	structures.	In	addition,	IS	auditors	must develop	an	understanding	of	the	business	control	structures.	This	type	of integrated	auditing	can	be	defined	as	the	process	whereby	appropriate	audit disciplines	are	combined	to	assess	key	internal	controls	over	an	operation, process	or	entity	and	focuses	on	risk.	A	risk	assessment	aims	to	understand	and identify	risk	arising	from	the	entity	and	its	environment,	including	relevant internal	controls.	At	this	stage,	the	role	of	an	IS	auditor	is	typically	to	understand and	identify	risk	under	topical	areas	such	as	information	management,	IT infrastructure,	IT	governance	and	IT	operations. Other	audit	and	assurance	specialists	will	seek	to	understand	the	organizational environment,	business	risk	and	business	controls.	A	key	element	of	the integrated	approach	is	a	discussion	among	the	whole	audit	team	of	emerging risk,	with	consideration	of	impact	and	likelihood. Detailed	audit	work	focuses	on	the	relevant	controls	in	place	to	manage	this	risk. IT	systems	frequently	provide	a	first	line	of	preventive	and	detective	controls, and	the	integrated	audit	approach	depends	on	a	sound	assessment	of	their efficiency	and	effectiveness.

The	integrated	audit	process	typically	involves	the	following	elements:

·	Identification	of	risk	faced	by	the	organization	for	the	area	being	audited ·	Identification	of	relevant	key	controls ·	Review	and	understanding	of	the	design	of	key	controls ·	Testing	that	key	controls	are	supported	by	the	IT	system ·	Testing	that	management	controls	operate	effectively ·	A	combined	report	or	opinion	on	control	risk,	design	and	weaknesses	An integrated	audit	demands	a	focus	on	business	risk	and	a	drive	for	creative	control solutions.	It	is	a	team	effort	of	audit	and	assurance	professionals	with	different skill	sets.	Using	this	approach	permits	a	single	audit	of	an	entity	with	one comprehensive	report.	An	additional	benefit	is	that	this	approach	assists	in	staff development	and	retention	by	providing	greater	variety	and	the	ability	to	see how	all	of	the	elements	(functional	and	IT)	mesh	together	to	form	the	complete picture.	See figure	1.14 for	an	integrated	auditing	approach.

<!-- image -->

The	integrated	audit	concept	has	also	radically	changed	the	way	audits	are accepted	and	valued	by	different	stakeholders.	For	example: ·	Employees	or	process	owners	better	understand	the	objectives	of	an	audit because	they	can	see	the	linkage	between	controls	and	audit	procedures. ·	Top	management	better	understands	the	linkage	between	increased	control effectiveness	and	corresponding	improvements	in	the	allocation	and	utilization of	IT	resources. ·	Shareholders	better	understand	the	linkage	between	the	push	for	a	greater degree	of	corporate	governance	and	its	impact	on	the	generation	of	financial statements	that	can	be	relied	on. integrated	audits. Note: A	CISA	candidate	should	be	familiar	with	the	integrated	audit	process	and All	these	developments	have	led	to	greater	impetus	for	the	growing	popularity	of steps. CASE	STUDY Betatronics	is	a	mid-sized	manufacturer	of	electronic	goods	with	headquarters	in the	United	States	and	factories	located	in	Latin	America.	An	IS	auditor	within the	enterprise	has	been	asked	to	perform	preliminary	work	that	will	assess	the organization's	readiness	for	a	review	to	measure	compliance	with	new	US-based regulatory	requirements. These	requirements	are	designed	to	ensure	that	management	is	taking	an	active role	in	setting	up	and	maintaining	a	well-controlled	environment	and	will	assess management's	review	and	testing	of	the	general	IT	controls.	Areas	to	be	assessed include: ·	Logical	and	physical	security ·	Change	management ·	Production	control	and	network	management ·	IT	governance ·	End-user	computing The	IS	auditor	has	been	given	six	months	to	perform	this	preliminary	work. In	previous	years,	repeated	problems	have	been	identified	in	the	areas	of	logical security	and	change	management.	Logical	security	deficiencies	noted	included the	sharing	of	administrator	accounts	and	failure	to	enforce	adequate	controls over	passwords.	Change	management	deficiencies	included	improper segregation	of	incompatible	duties	and	failure	to	document	all	changes. Additionally,	the	process	for	deploying	operating	system	updates	to	servers	was found	to	be	only	partially	effective. In	anticipation	of	the	work	to	be	performed	by	the	IS	auditor,	the	chief information	officer	(CIO)	requested	direct	reports	to	develop	narratives	and process	flows	describing	the	major	activities	for	which	IT	is	responsible. These	were	completed,	approved	by	the	various	process	owners	and	the	CIO, and	then	forwarded	to	the	IS	auditor	for	examination. 1. What	should	the	IS	auditor	do FIRST ? A.	Perform	a	survey	audit	of	logical	access	controls. B.	Revise	the	audit	plan	to	focus	on	risk-based	auditing. C.	Perform	an	IT	risk	assessment. D.	Begin	testing	controls	that	the	IS	auditor	feels	are	most	critical. 2. When	auditing	the	logical	security,	the	IS	auditor	is MOST concerned	when observing: A.	The	system	administrator	account	is	known	by	everybody. B.	The	passwords	are	not	enforced	to	change	frequently. C.	The	network	administrator	is	given	excessive	permissions. D.	The	IT	department	does	not	have	written	policy	on	privilege When	testing	program	change	management	in	this	case,	how	should	the	sample management. 3. be	selected?

- A. Change	management	documents	should	be	selected	at	random	and examined	for	appropriateness. B.	Changes	to	production	code	should	be	sampled	and	traced	to appropriate	authorizing	documentation. C.	Change	management	documents	should	be	selected	based	on system	criticality	and	examined	for	appropriateness. D.	Changes	to	production	code	should	be	sampled	and	traced	back	to	systemproduced	logs	indicating	the	date	and	time	of	the	change. 4. List	three	general	IT	controls	the	IS	auditor	would	use	for	substantive	testing	in this	case. After	the	preliminary	work	has	been	completed,	Betatronics	decides	to	plan audits	for	the	next	two	years.	After	accepting	the	appointment,	the	IS	auditor notes	that: ·	The	entity	has	an	audit	charter	that	details	the	scope	and	responsibilities	of	the IS	audit	function	and	specifies	the	audit	committee	as	the	overseeing	body	for audit	activity. ·	The	entity	is	subject	to	regulatory	compliance	requirements	that	require	its management	to	certify	the	effectiveness	of	the	internal	control	system	as	it relates	to	financial	reporting. ·	The	entity	has	been	recording	consistent	growth	over	the	last	two	years	at double	the	industry	average. ·	The	entity	has	seen	increased	employee	turnover	as	well. 5.

## The FIRST priority	of	the	IS	auditor	in	year	one	should	be	to	study	the:

A.	previous	IS	audit	reports	and	plan	the	audit	schedule. B.	audit	charter	and	plan	the	audit	schedule. C.	impact	of	the	increased	employee	turnover. D.	impact	of	the	implementation	of	a	new	ERP	on	the	IT	environment. 6. How	should	the	IS	auditor	evaluate	backup	and	batch	processing	within computer	operations? A.	Rely	on	the	service	auditor's	report	of	the	service	provider. B.	Study	the	contract	between	the	entity	and	the	service	provider. C.	Compare	the	service	delivery	report	to	the	service	level	agreement. D.	Plan	and	carry	out	an	independent	review	of	computer	operations. 7. During	the	day-to-day	work,	the	IS	auditor	advises	there	is	a	risk	that	log	review may	not	result	in	timely	detection	of	errors.	This	is	an	example	of	which	of	the following: A.	inherent	risk B.	residual	risk C.	control	risk D.	material	risk 8. The	IS	auditor	advised	the	CIO	and	team	to	improve	the	general	IT

control	environment.	COBIT	was	proposed	to	be	adapted.	What recommendations	would	the	IS	auditor	make	when	considering	this framework?

ANSWERS	TO	CASE	STUDY	QUESTIONS 1. A. Performing	a	survey	audit	of	logical	access	controls	would	occur	after	an	IT	risk assessment. B. Revising	the	audit	plan	to	focus	on	risk-based	auditing	would occur	after	an	IT	risk	assessment. C. An	IT	risk	assessment	should	be	performed	first	to	ascertain which	areas	present	the	greatest	risk	and	what	controls mitigate	that	risk.	Although	narratives	and	process	flows have	been	created,	the	organization	has	not	yet	assessed which	controls	are	critical. D. Testing	controls	that	the	IS	auditor	feels	are	most	critical	would	occur	after	an	IT risk	assessment. 2. A. The	system	administrator	account	being	known	by everybody	is	most	dangerous.	In	that	case,	any	user	could perform	any	action	in	the	system,	including	file	access, permission	and	parameter	adjustment. B. Infrequent	password	changing	would	present	a	concern	but would	not	be	a	serious	as	everyone	knowing	the	system administrator	account. C. The	network	administrator	being	given	excessive	permissions would	present	a	concern,	but	it	would	not	be	as	serious	as everyone	knowing	the	system	administrator	account. D. The	absence	of	a	privilege	management	policy	would	be	a concern,	but	it	would	not	be	as	serious	as	everyone	knowing	the system	administrator	account. 3. A. When	a	sample	is	chosen	from	a	set	of	control	documents,	there is	no	way	to	ensure	that	every	change	was	accompanied	by appropriate	control	documentation.

B.

When	testing	a	control,	it	is	advisable	to	trace	from	the	item being controlled	to	the	relevant	control	documentation.	When a	sample	is	chosen	from	a	set	of	control	documents,	there	is no	way	to	ensure	that	every	change	was	accompanied	by appropriate	control	documentation.	Accordingly,	changes	to production	code	provide	the	most	appropriate	basis	for selecting	a	sample. C. When	a	sample	is	chosen	from	a	set	of	control	documents,	there is	no	way	to	ensure	that	every	change	was	accompanied	by appropriate	control	documentation. D. When	testing	a	control,	it	is	advisable	to	trace	from	the	item being	controlled	to	the	relevant	control	documentation. 4. Some	possible	answers	include: ·	The	IS	auditor	can	check	which	account	was	used	for	executing	a	particular system	administrator	task	recently. ·	The	IS	auditor	can	check	if	there	was	a	change	record	for	any selected	system	changes	(i.e.,	server	reboot	and	patching). ·	The	IS	auditor	can	look	into	the	transactions	to	see	if	they	separated	the incompatible	duties. 5.

Previous	IS	audit	reports	will	be	revisited	to	save	redundant	work	and	for

A. reference	when	doing	the	particular	IS	audit	work.

## B.

## The	audit	charter	defines	the	purpose,	authority	and responsibility	of	the	IS	audit	activities.	It	also	sets	the foundation	for	upcoming	activities.

C. Impact	of	employee	turnover	would	be	addressed	when negotiating	the	follow-up	activities	on	respective	areas	if	there	is	any	gap	to close. D. Impact	of	the	implementation	of	a	new	ERP	would	be	addressed when	negotiating	the	follow-up	activities	on	respective	areas	if	there	is	any	gap to	close. 6. A. The	service	auditor's	report	cannot	assure	the	discovery	of control	inefficiencies. B. Review	of	the	contract	cannot	assure	the	discovery	of	control

inefficiencies.

C. Comparing	the	service	delivery	report	and	the	service	level agreement	cannot	assure	the	discovery	of	control	inefficiencies. D. IS	audit	should	conduct	an	independent	review	of	the	backup and	batch	processing.	All	other	choices	cannot	assure	the discovery	of	control	inefficiencies	in	the	process. 7. A. This	is	not	an	example	of	inherent	risk.	Inherent	risk	is	the	risk	level	or	exposure without	considering	the	actions	that management	has	taken	or	might	take	(e.g.,	implementing controls). B. This	is	not	an	example	of	residual	risk.	Residual	risk	is	the remaining	risk	after	management	has	implemented	a	risk response. C. Control	risk	exists	when	a	risk	cannot	be	prevented	or detected	on	a	timely	basis	by	the	system	of	IS	controls,	which is	what	is described	in	this	instance. D.

This	is	not	an	example	of	material	risk.	Material	risk	is	any	risk	large	enough	to

threaten	the	overall	success	of	the	business	in	a	material	way. 8. Possible	answer:	The	COBIT	framework	can	be	leveraged	and	adapted. Each	process	can	be	classified	as	fully	addressed,	partially	addressed	and	not applicable	by	comparing	the	standard	COBIT	framework	to	the	organization's reality.	Further	frameworks,	standards	and	practices	can	be	included	in	each

respective	process,	as	COBIT	guidance	suggests.

## Chapter	2: Governance	and	Management	of	IT Overview Domain	2	Exam	Content	Outline Learning	Objectives/Task	Statements Suggested	Resources	for	Further	Study Self-assessment	Questions Answers	to	Self-assessment	Questions Part	A:	IT	Governance 2.0 Introduction 2.1 IT	Governance	and	IT	Strategy 2.2

## IT-related	Frameworks

2.3

- 2.11	IT	Performance	Monitoring	and	Reporting 2.12	Quality	Assurance	and

IT	Standards,	Policies	and	Procedures 2.4 Organizational	Structure 2.5 Enterprise	Architecture 2.6 Enterprise	Risk	Management 2.7 Maturity	Models 2.8 Laws,	Regulations	and	Industry	Standards	Affecting	the Organization Part	B:	IT	Management 2.9 IT	Resource	Management 2.10	IT	Service	Provider	Acquisition	and	Management Quality	Management	of	IT Case	Study Case	Study

## Answers	to	Case	Study	Questions

OVERVIEW

Governance	and	management	of	IT	are	integral	parts	of	enterprise	governance. Effective	governance	and	management	of	IT	consist	of	the	leadership	and organizational	structures	and	processes	that	ensure	that	the	enterprise's	IT sustains	and	extends	the	enterprise's	strategy	and	objectives. Knowledge	of	IT	governance	is	fundamental	to	the	work	of	the	IS	auditor,	and	it forms	the	foundation	for	the	development	of	sound	control	practices	and mechanisms	for	management	oversight	and	review. This	domain	represents	17	percent	of	the	CISA	examination	(approximately	26 questions).

## DOMAIN	2	EXAM	CONTENT	OUTLINE

## Part	A:	IT	Governance

1.	IT	Governance	and	IT	Strategy 2.	IT-related	Frameworks 3.	IT	Standards,	Policies,	and	Procedures 4.	Organizational	Structure 5.	Enterprise	Architecture 6.	Enterprise	Risk	Management 7.	Maturity	Models 8.	Laws,	Regulations	and	Industry	Standards	Affecting	the	Organization Part	B. IT	Management

1. IT	Resource	Management
2. IT	Service	Provider	Acquisition	and	Management
3. IT	Performance	Monitoring	and	Reporting
4. Quality	Assurance	and	Quality	Management	of	IT

LEARNING	OBJECTIVES/TASK	STATEMENTS

Within	this	domain,	the	IS	auditor	should	be	able	to: ·	Evaluate	the	IT	strategy	for	alignment	with	the	organization's	strategies	and objectives.	(T5) ·	Evaluate	the	effectiveness	of	IT	governance	structure	and	IT	organizational structure.	(T6) ·	Evaluate	the	organization's	management	of	IT	policies	and	practices.	(T7) ·	Evaluate	the	organization's	IT	policies	and	practices	for	compliance	with regulatory	and	legal	requirements.	(T8) ·	Evaluate	IT	resource	and	portfolio	management	for	alignment	with	the organization's	strategies	and	objectives.	(T9) ·	Evaluate	the	organization's	risk	management	policies	and	practices.	(T10) ·	Evaluate	IT	management	and	monitoring	of	controls.	(T11) ·	Evaluate	the	monitoring	and	reporting	of	IT	key	performance	indicators	(KPIs). (T12) ·	Evaluate	whether	IT	supplier	selection	and	contract	management	processes align	with	business	requirements.	(T15) ·	Evaluate	whether	IT	service	management	practices	align	with	business requirements.	(T20) ·	Conduct	periodic	review	of	information	systems	and	enterprise architecture.	(T21) ·	Evaluate	data	governance	policies	and	practices.	(T25)